# Chris Voss negotiation MasterClass: review

This post is about the [negotiation MasterClass taught by Chris
Voss](https://www.masterclass.com/classes/chris-voss-teaches-the-art-of-negotiation)
and more broadly about the techniques and worldviews shared in that
MasterClass. I [watched this MasterClass in April
2020](https://ese.vipulnaik.com/#consumptionList).

My post discusses some of the relationship -- similarities and
differences -- with rationalist advice. These portions should be of
particular relevance to LessWrong and are part of the reason for
posting to LessWrong.

This is a fairly lengthy post, so please use the sections to navigate
to the portions you are most interested in.

I cover a lot in this review:

* What is this a review of?
* Why am I doing this review?
* Worldview
* Negotiation principles
* Negotiation techniques

## What is this a review of?

### Who is Chris Voss?

[Christopher Voss](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Christopher_Voss)
worked ta the FBI as a lead hostage negotiator. In 2008 he left to
form his own company, The Black Swan Group, that offers coaching to
people on negotiation techniques.

### What is MasterClass?

[MasterClass](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MasterClass) is a player
in the growing edutainmment space, combining education and
entertainment. There are 100+ "classes" in MasterClass. Each class is
taught by a subject matter expert (the teacher), and includes several
videos (changing from 2 to 30 minutes, usually 5 to 20 minutes). The
typical video format just includes the teacher speaking to the camera,
but there are occasionally interactive sessions with other
participants, or other co-instructors.

Course notes can be downloaded. There are also community features on
MasterClass.

You may have seen video ads for MasterClass on YouTube!

### What does this cost?

A MasterClass annual subscription all-access pass costs $180. A single
MasterClass (such as Chris Voss's) can be purchased for $90.

### How long is the Chris Voss MasterClass?

There are 18 videos and the total video time is 3 hours 4 minutes;
this includes three live exercises, that I do *not* discuss here
(since they are more for demonstration purposes of a range of
techniques).

The class guide is 14 pages long, including a cover page (this blog
post overlaps quite a bit with the class guide).

### Are there other ways of watching the MasterClass without paying the subscription fee?

You can sign up and cancel within 30 days to get a full refund. This
gives you enough time to consume the Chris Voss MasterClass.

You may be able to sign up for a free week; however, I'm not sure what
subset of the videos in the MasterClass are available. More details
[here](https://donotpay.com/learn/masterclass-free-trial).

### Are there other ways of accessing the information without watching the MasterClass?

Many of the techniques discussed in the MasterClass are discussed
online, including in videos from Chris Voss and others. I have more
links for each of the individual techniques, so you can use my post to
basically get a "free" version of the MasterClass. You can also Google
around for more videos and written materials on the techniques.

[Masterwiki.how](https://masterwiki.how/) can be a helpful free
version of MasterClass, but it does not seem to have Chris Voss's
MasterClass.

### What's the value-add of the MasterClass beyond the free material in and linked from this blog post?

My blog post didn't exist at the time I bought the MasterClass; I
think in the absence of such an alternative, the MasterClass was worth
paying something for. In fact, I would say that the exposure to Chris
Voss's ideas was worth the price of two full years of MasterClass
subscription for me, though I could have cancelled after 30 days once
I had consumed the Chris Voss MasterClass.

Now that this blog post exists, and given the great amount of online
material, the value-add of the MasterClass is less clear. I think
there is still a case for it, but it probably isn't worth spending a
full year's subscription of $180 just for this class, nor is it worth
spending $90 to buy it. With that said, if you find several other
MasterClasses that you consider worth watching, the Chris Voss
MasterClass could tip the scales.

Given the ability to cancel after 30 days, it seems worth trying it
out if you think there's a chance it will be worthwhile.

Since rationalists have often spent $1,000+ on CFAR workshops and
found it worthwhile, I think there's a good chance that many will find
the class worth paying for, even after having access to the material
in the blog post.

### What are some interactive discussions where these techniques are critically examined?

The MasterClass is mostly just Chris Voss speaking, with nobody
challenging him. I like to see people questioned about their ideas,
ideally with question that I have or would have if I thought more
about it. Since watching the MasterClass, I've [watched several
interviews of Chris Voss](https://ese.vipulnaik.com/#consumptionList)
that I list below:

* [Master the Art of Negotiating in Business and Life: Lewis Howes](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pd7tjnVYMzY)
* [#MasterClassLive with Chris Voss](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nZcBuSCT3Io)
* [The Knowledge Project #27 â€” Chris Voss](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yHjUApypNsU)
* [WHY SUCCESS Comes From Mastering Negotiation In BUSINESS & LIFE | Chris Voss & Lewis Howes](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O_iKeiPhisw)

## Why am I doing this review?

### I think the MasterClass and the material it covered were pretty good

Chris Voss's MasterClass was the main reason I signed up for
MasterClass, and I finished it within a day after signing up. I liked
it quite a bit then. Over time, and after having thought about its
ideas and watched other related material, I continue to think the
ideas are pretty good.

I do not make claims about how much of the material originated from
Voss versus was learned by him from others (including the FBI
manual). Regardless of Voss's role as innovator versus peddler, the
stuff covered is good.

### I have already shared several tidbits of insight I learned with friends, but would like to have a public write-up

Of the ideas I learned from the MasterClass, I've already shared
several with friends. However, given that the MasterClass is
paywalled, I think it would be helpful to have a public write-up of
the ideas that I cam link to. A public write-up would also benefit people
outside my inner circle of friends.

### I broadly think the LessWrong community should be more aware of and engage with these bodies of knowledge

Rationality offers a powerful way of viewing the world, but there are
also large bodies of knowledge around human interaction developed by
others. Fruitful exploration of these bodies of knowledge can help
enhance and deepen our rationality.

## Worldview

### Outward focus

Negotiation tactics are mostly focused outward: they're focused on how
to deal with the other side (known as the "counterpart"), not how to
deal with yourself.

A large part of the focus of rationality is inward: how to reason
better, how to tame and use your emotions, how to achieve
goals. Similarly, many techniques such as meditation and relaxation
techniques have an inward focus too.

With negotiation tactics, one's own goals obviously matter, but the
goals of the other person are front-and-center.

There are a couple of ways that negotiation tactics relate to
inward-focused activities. First, in principle it is possible to apply
some negotiation tactics in self-negotiation. Interestingly, some such
applications have crude similarities to self-talk techniques (such as
CBT or EFT).

Second, in order to negotiate effectively with others, it generally
helps to have taken care of yourself *before* that. The idea is that
in a negotiation, the counterpart and the situation take center
stage. If you're bringing your own baggage to the situation, though,
it becomes harder to apply best principles of keeping the focus on the
situation and making the counterpart feel heard and addressed.

The negotiation MasterClass does not discuss the first point; it does
bring up some ideas related to the second point but indirectly.

### Dealing with people who do not aspire to epistemic virtues

The negotiation techniques in the MasterClass grew out of efforts to
deal with hostage kidnappers, and evolved to address difficult
business negotiations. These people aren't necessarily irrational, but
they are not aspiring to epistemic virtues. Pointing out their
cognitive biases will not make them thank you for helping them achieve
their epistemic goals.

The negotiation techniques therefore can be quite different from norms
recommended for rationalist cultures, where there is an assumption
that all parties are aspiring toward epistemic virtue. For instance,
[tell
culture](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/rEBXN3x6kXgD4pLxs/tell-culture)
can be great as a rationalist norm but a naive application of tell
culture principles would contradict many aspects of negotiation
techniques (thuogh reconciliation is possible).

One concern we might have about negotiation techniques is that they
specifically *rely* on the irrationality of one's counterparts, and so
would fall flat or even backfire in more epistemically virtuous
environments. After thinking about the various techniques, I think
this actually isn't much of a concern, as long as the person applying
the negotiation techniques adjusts the mix effectively based on what
is needed. Broadly, I do not think these negotiation techniques are
what is sometimes called the [dark
arts](https://www.lesswrong.com/tag/dark-arts) on LessWrong (though
they probably could be interpreted as such!). Later in this post, as I
discuss each negotiation technique, I discuss what aspects or variants
of it I consider "dark arts"y.

### Emotion-focused or cognitively focused?

While Voss gives a lot of importance to emotions, I think it would be
wrong to think of the negotiation techniques as primarily
emotion-focused. Rather, I think the negotiation techniques try to
pick at underlying motivations, some of which could be emotions! I
think there is a moderately sound cognitive and epistemic grounding
for the negotiation techniques, though the role of human emotions is
very important to understanding how successful the techniques will be.

### Greater applicability to synchronous interactions

Many of the negotiation techniques are applicable to synchronous
interactions, including in-person and phone interactions. In general,
the techniques seem optimized for high-bandwidth communication with
frequent back-and-forth. I found some techniques as well as some
principles to have broader applicability, including to more
asynchronous and one-to-may communication contexts.

## Negotiation principles

This section covers my own interpretation of key "principles"
behind the individual negotiation techniques. The way I frame it
doesn't always match how Voss presents ideas in the MasterClass or
elsewhere, and may not be endorsed by Voss.

### Show, don't tell, that you are listening and collaborating in good faith

A lot of the negotiation techniques boil down to a [show, don't
tell](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Show,_don't_tell) approach of
demonstrating good faith. Many of these "show"s are constructive proof
that would be hard to fake for somebody who is not listening and not
interested in a good faith collaboration (examples include labeling
and the accusations audit). Many of them also directly create value by
making substantive progress in zeroing in on the issues involved.

A key point: the "show, don't tell" applies at the meta level of your
sincerity and competence; obviously there will be cases where you have
to tell the other person factual information or ideas. This is only
loosely related to pedagogy's "show, don't tell", so actions that are
"show"s in terms of demonstrating sincerity could be "show"s or
"tell"s at the object level.

### It's about your counterpart

An important aspect of the negotiation techniques is to center them on
your counterpart, i.e., the person you are negotiating with. Things
like, be curious about what they have to say, be tactically
empathetic, always show that you care about the impact of your words
and actions on them. Let them go first. By and large, avoid
first-person pronouns, so don't say "What I'm hearing is ..." or "I
want ..." or "I need ..." (this is not an absolute injunction, but
good to start with). Don't make the other person feel you are putting
them on the spot.

### Slow people down and trigger deeper, reflective thinking

Often, in high-stress situations, people are thinking impulsively,
defensively, and carelessly. The many negotiation techniques Voss
teaches are designed partly to get your counterpart to slow down,
relax, and think more reflectively (Kahneman's "system two"
thinking). This frame of mind is more conducive to solving challenging
problems collaboratively.

### Start low, end high

A general theme in negotiation is how both parties perceive it, and
whether, at the end of it, they feel like it was a worthwhile
endeavor. Starting with the difficult portions and gradually making
progress to end on a positive note is important.

## Negotiation techniques

### Tone of voice

Voss identifies three kinds of tones of voice:

* Assertive: Ideally never use this!
* Playful/accommodating: Use this when learning and
  collaborating. Generally, this should be used about 80% of the time.
* Late-night FM DJ: This is a calm, slow, and firm tone used to
  communicate immovability. Use this instead of the assertive voice
  whe standing firm. Generally, this should be used about 20% of the
  time.

He also identifies two kinds of inflections:

* Inquisitive (upward inflection)
* Declarative (downward inflection)

Inquisitive inflections are good when you want to get the other side
to talk more.

#### My personal experience with tone of voice

Since a lot of my communication is text-based rather than voice-based,
these concepts have had limited utility to me. One general idea that
I've taken from this is to speak more slowly (one of the aspects of
the late-night FM DJ voice). I might also have reduced my use of
assertive voice and increased my use of playful/accommodating voice as
a result of being influenced by these ideas.

Some of the principles also carry over from tone of voice to tone of
text communication. Even prior to this MasterClass, I adopted a upbeat
style of communication, sprinkling exclamation points and smileys in
future drafts. I've continued with this practice.

#### How "dark arts"y is tone of voice?

I don't see anything "dark arts"y about using using a
playful/accommodating tone of voice.

#### Does tone of voice have a place in rational discourse?

Tone of voice (or tone of text) provides another dimension of
communication that influences discourse. Using it in a good way seems
consistent with the idea of rational discourse. Since a lot of ratioal
discourse is centered around open exchange of ideas, the
playful/accommodating tone of voice seems suited to it.

### Mirroring

Mirroring is the technique of repeating about 1 to 3 words of the last
sentence the other person said.

Mirroring in general is helpful as it is a low-effort way of showing
the other side that you're listening and engaged with what they say.

Mirroring with upward inflection (i.e., a kind of questioning tone) is
helpful as a prompt to get the other person to continue expanding and
elaborating. This can be helpful if you don't quite understand what
the other person said, or you want them to elaborate more.

Instead of the MasterClass, you can watch a [free Chris Voss YouTube
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wIBc2T2RKSA) on mirroring.

#### My personal experience with mirroring

I have not tried to use mirroring much in my life. My impression has
been that mirroring is most useful as a low-effort way to engage
another person and learn more about what's on their mind. It may be a
bit less useful in cases where other, more high-effort and high-reward
techniques, can be used.

I used mirroring once in a low-stakes situation with success; a
colleague and I were on a call with a third party who ended up not
showing up, so we were just waiting for about ten minutes. My
colleague was just chatting about stuff going on with his work. I had
no particular agenda in terms of information I wanted to know, but I
also didn't mind hearing him, so I decided to try using mirroring to
help show I was engaged without putting in a lot of effort. This
seemed to work well; at the end of it, my colleague said it was great
chatting, despite me basically saying nothing.

#### How "dark arts"y is mirroring?

Mirroring as information-gathering doesn't seem dark arts-y at all to
me.

Mirroring as a way of showing you're listening can be dark arts-y if
you're *not actually listening*. Somebody practiced enough at
mirroring could probably do it automatically without paying close
attention to what the counterpart is saying. The counterpart then
thinks you were engaged and listening (because they hear your mirrors
and don't even realize you were mirroring) but you actually
weren't. To be clear, this is not the sort of mirroring that Voss
encourages; he emphasizes genuine curioosity and interest.

#### Does mirroring have a place in rational discourse?

I think mirroring has a place in rational discourse, but a relatively
small one. I'm much more excited about the other techniques discussed
(that are both high-effort ad high-reward), including labeling.

### Labeling

Labeling is the act of providing a short summary of the underlying
emotions, thoughts, and ideas behind what your counterpart is saying
or doing.

A tactical aspect of labeling: Voss recommends using "It
seems/sounds/feels/looks like ..." or "You seem/sound/look like ..."
before articulating the label (in a single sentence where possible),
and being deferential in tone. It is also open to correction (see the
next section, mislabeling). The use of first-person pronoun framings
such as "I think ..." or "What I'm hearing is ..." is discouraged
because you want it to be about your counterpart and the situation,
not about yourself.

Labeling is more high-effort than mirroring: rather than just using
short-term memory to remember and pick words fromm the last sentence,
you need to listen to the entirety of what the other person is saying
(as well as tone of voice and nonverbal cues where applicable) and
summarize it. But it's also more high-reward, because it shows a
deeper understanding, helps provide clarity to both sides, and can
lead to real progress.

There's a [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pHHHg7PWz48) going
over mirroring and labeling.

#### Labeling negatives

Voss claims that labeling negatives "always" diffuses them. The key
point is to label a negative by accepting it, rather than by denying
or contesting it.

For instance, instead of saying "I don't want to sound too demanding"
you say "This is going to sound demanding". Or instead of saying
"Don't get upset" say "It seems like you are upset".

Instead of the MasterClass, you can check out [this
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ThQ8xPGg-QQ) on labeling
negatives.

#### Labeling positives

Voss claims that labeling positives tends to reinforce them (the
opposite of the impact of labeling negatives). For instance, "you
sound really excited about this" or "it sounds like you're very happy
with the way this turned out".

#### My personal experience with labeling

I've generally found labeling to be more useful than mirroring,
particularly when a lot of raw information is being conveyed and it
needs to be processed.

#### How "dark arts"y is labeling?

Labeling generally seems like a positive thing and not like a dark
art. While labels could be misused, I don't see the potential for
misuse as big enough to make labeling a dark art.

#### Does labeling have a place in rational discourse?

Absolutely! I think labeling is pretty valuable. A lot of rational
discourse already follows similar practice; for instance, providing
labels/summaries of what another person said is viewed positively in
the community.

The rationalist community also places more importance on
self-labeling, something that negotiation strategy frowns upon (it's
not about you, it's about your counterpart).

### Mislabeling

Mislabeling refers to the (usually intentional, or at least
probabilistically intentional) application of an incorrect or
exaggerated label to give the counterpart the opportunity to correct
you and reveal more information. So instead of directly asking for the
reasons for something, a mislabel might attribute a reason that's
probably wrong, and let the other person correct it.

For instance, if a person declines to do an activity, you may mislabel
it as "it sounds like you really hate doing this" which gives them the
opportunity to correct by saying "actually the time doesn't work, I
would love to do it next time".

Brandon Voss (Chris Voss's son and business partner) has a video on
mislabeling [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0vls0Jbd98g).

#### How "dark arts"y is mislabeling?

There is a "dark arts" form of mislabeling, where your goal is not to
get information from the other person, but rather to make them claim
something that's beneficial to you. That happens when your mislabel is
done with a desire to have the other person reassure you. Mislabeling,
when done with curiosity, deference, and a genuine openness to being
corrected, and with the goal of getting information rather than
manipulate the other person into claiming something, seems good to me.

#### Does mislabeling have a place in rational discourse?

This is a little unclear. I think mislabeling is okay in rational
discourse if the mislabel is still the leading individual
candidate. For instance, if you have several hypotheses to explain
something, and the leading hypothesis has 30% chance, higher than any
other, formulating that hypothesis as a label seems reasonable (and
it's probably a mislabel because there's a 70% chance it's wrong). On
the other hand, deliberately choosing a low-probability hypothesis as
a mislabel seems not very rational.

### Dynamic silence

Dynamic silence is the idea of just staying silent, usually either
right after you mirror, label, or mislabel, or when things fall silent
in general. The idea is to give the other person space to keep going
on and to correct you. Accoording to Voss, dynamic silence works best
after you have established, through mirroring and labeling, that you
are listening, engaged, and understanding.

There's a video discussing dynamic silence
[here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QKYzRXl3jXM).

#### My personal experience with dynamic silence

I have found dynamic silence to be generally useful when the other
side is reasonably articulate. I haven't really needed to consciously
practice it; it seems to come naturally.

### Calibrated questions: using "what" and "how" rather than "why"

Calibrated questions (also called open-ended questions) are what/how
questions designed to both elicit information from the counterpart and
start the collaborative process with them by introducing to them the
considerations and challenges on your side (Voss calls this "forced
empathy"). According to Voss, the main purpose of calibrated questions
isn't necessarily to get clear answers, but to get the other side to
slow down and think. Two of his favorite questions are:

* "How am I supposed to do that?"
* "What's going to happen if I do that?"

There's a video of Chris Voss explaining these questions
[here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=46cwaiUq58U).

Voss is generally against the use of "why" questions because he claims
that, universally across languages and cultures, it gets people
defensive. When people hear "why" it sounds to them like you think
there's something wrong, and they want to defend themselves against
accusations.

#### Legitimate questions

Another related idea that Voss goes over in the MasterClass is to ask
"legitimate" questions (and/or raise legitimate concerns) --
basically, the calibrated questions that, if the oother side were to
hear, they would have to agree that this is a valid point. For
instance, rather than asking "How will you guarantee me that X?" ask
the underlying question which might be "How do we deal with the fact
that I am operating with uncertainty regarding X?" Voss gives the
example of the proof-of-life question that hostage negotiators must
ask the kidnapper; he suggests a "How do I know the victim is alive?"
rather than demanding a proof of life.

#### My personal experience with calibrated questions

I have generally found the calibrated questions idea to work well,
though I've generally used it more for information-gathering than for
forced empathy. Avoiding "why" in particular seems to make a lot of
intuitive sense and I've generally found it to be effective at
reducing both the defensiveness of the other side and the perceived
antagonism in the interaction to third parties.

#### How "dark arts"y are calibrated questions?

I don't see any clear mechanism by which calibrated questions are dark
arts-y.

#### Do calibrated questions have a place in rational discourse?

Yes! In fact, I think the idea of using what/how questions instead of
why questions has a purely rational basis, in addition to the reasons
based on the emotional triggers that "why" could produce. Namely, a
"what"/"how" question tends to be more constructive or specific. A
"why" question is much more vague, like an injunction to "explain
yourself".

For instance, if you ask "Why did you do X?" it's a very difficult
question to address. Instead, a question like "What was your
motivation for X?" has an appropriate level of focus on motivation. On
the other hand, a question like "What events led you to do X?" has a
focus on history. By picking a specific aspect, it avoids the very
vague "explain yourself" character of the "why" question.

### Accusations audit

The "accusations audit" is a comprehensive list of the negative
assumptions, thoughts, and feelings that the other side has about you
-- both things that they already might harbor and things that they are
at risk of harboring once you start revealing the information you're
planning to reveal. The accusations audit is then communicated to the
other side to show that you're aware of the issues and also to get out
in front of them so that both sides can be more relaxed and make
progress.

The accusations audit is a proactive version of labeling negatives,
where instead of waiting for negatives to pop up before labeling them,
you get out in front of them. Some of the remarks made previously
about Voss's claim that labeling negatives diffuses them also apply
here.

As with labeling negatives in general, it's important in the
accusations audit to not try to preemptively defend against or contest
the negatives. The first step is to acknowledge the negative, and let
the other side acknowledge your acknowledgement. In many cases, the
act of acknowledgement itself diffuses the negative enough; in other
cases, there's enough time after the acknowledgement to address the
substantive issues raised by the negative.

Chris Voss explains the accusations audit [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aupL1wXVbGA).

Brandon Voss has a practical video on the accusations audit
[here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-TdvtxranNk).

#### My personal experience with the accusations audit

The accusations audit can be tricky without a good mental model of the
other person. It can also be tricky to do if you have a lot of
self-esteem issues of your own. I think a key ingredient to the
success of the accusations audit is the ability to genuinely think
from the other side's perspective, rather than project yoour own
insecurities.

With that caveat, I've found the accusations audit useful,
particularly for being able to start discusions that may otherwise not
have happened (unlike reactive labeling, the accusations audit can be
started asynchronoously and used as input to try to get the other side
engaged).

#### How "dark arts"y is the accusations audit?

I don't think the accusations audit is "dark arts"y. With that said, a
variant of it could be, where you trump up exaggerated accusations
with the goal of manipulating the other person into consoling you. The
key way to overcome that is that the "accusations" have to be the
other person's accusations toward you, not your accusations toward
them. There should be no judgment fromm your end conveyed as you
describe the accusations.

#### Does the accusations audit have a place in rational discourse?

I think so! I think bringing out negative assumptions, thoughts, and
feelings early creates the scope to actually address them in the
interaction.

### No-oriented questions

The idea behind no-oriented questions is to frame yes/no questions in
a way that the answer that will make your life easier is the "no"
answer. I found this one of the most interesting and thought-provoking
negotiation techniques.

For instance, instead of asking "Is it ok to publish this?" ask "Are
there any concerns with publishing this?"

The simplest reason, as given by Voss, is that "yes" can make us feel
trapped, like we're being perssured or tricked into agreeing with
something. On the other hand, "no" makes us feel freer and safer, like
we have protected ourselves. I think there are a few other factors
that make no-oriented questions valuable, that I explore in the next
few paras.

Chris Voss has a video on no-oriented questions
[here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WiuIHvF1EB0).

#### My personal experience with no-oriented questions

Among all the negotiation techniques, I feel that the switch to
no-oriented questions has been the one that's influenced my day-to-day
actions the most. Part of this might be that this technique is highly
applicable to low-bandwidth, asynchronous interaction, that forms a
large proportion of my interaction.

In particular, the majority of my questions, particularly around
getting consent/approval for joint actions, are now no-oriented. While
I think in most cases it doesn't end up mattering, I feel like it does
make things smoother when it does matter (i.e., when the other side's
answer is the opposite of what's easier for me).

#### Do no-oriented questions have a place in rational discourse?

Other than the psychological benefits of "no" making us feel more
protected, are there other benefits to no-oriented questions? I think
so, and I think it would be good to generally push more toward
no-oriented questions.

First, I think the act of formulating a no-oriented question helps us,
as question-creators, think of the nature of the objection/challenge
more clearly. The act of formulating the question itself therefore
improves the likelihood of catching issues.

Second, formulating a no-oriented question makes the other side more
comfortable responding in *either* way: with a yes (i.e., the answer
that makes life harder) *and* with a no (i.e., that makes life
easier). By using a no-oriented formulation, you're signaling to the
other side that you are prepared for bad news (in the form of a
"yes"). This also means that if they deliver bad news, it feels more
collaborative -- both sides are actively trying to unearth the bad
news and address it rather than hide from it -- and less of a fight.

Third, responding to a no-oriented question also triggers more
thinking from the other side, partly because you've already show you
are willing to hear bad news.

### Tackling loss aversion

Voss talks about [loss
aversion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loss_aversion) -- he calls it
"fear of loss" -- and says that this distorts people's thinking a
lot. So what do you do if the idea on the table isn't about a loss?
His suggestion seems to boil dow to framing it in terms of a loss by
using the [opportunity
cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost) framing:
basically point to the other side what thy lose by *not* doig the
deal.

#### How "dark arts"y is tackling loss aversion?

To the extent that this is about combating and neutralizing an
existing loss aversion bias, I think it's not a dark art. But to the
extent it's about invoking loss aversion and creating distortionary
fear, I think it is a dark art. A lot depends on the implementation.

#### My personal experience with tackling loss aversion

I do not remember any situations where I consciously applied this
technique; also, I was aalready broadly aware of the ideas of loss
aversion and opportunity cost so the marginal impact of the
MasterClass was low for me.

Chris Voss talks about loss aversion in [this
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8vW6gPjk5Sc).

