# Financial mechanics: my practices

There's a bunch of discussion of personal finances online, but a lot
of it is geared around how to make, save, and invest money. A lot of
the advice is also geared around and influenced by the need to sell
stuff and encourage consumerism, partly due to things like brand
sponsorships.

One angle to finances that I'd like to see discussed more is financial
mechanics: basic best practices around finances to reduce the
day-to-day overhead of managing finances. In that vein, I decided to
write this blog post to document some of my own practices around
financial mechanics. The set of practices I have chosen has near-zero
financial cost (important!) and very low time cost beyond the initial
setup (also important!). It's also geared heavily toward people who aren't into a lot of "consumerist" stuff, though I think it could be useful to others

I also want to do a separate post talking specifically about my
experience with credit cards and credit scores. So this particular
post doesn't talk much about the "credit" side of things.

## Checking account and checking account drawdown cycle

### What's a checking account?

A checking account, also known as a transactional account or current
account, is an account that is meant to be used for day-to-day
purchases and transactions. Debit cards are tied to checking accounts,
so any payments made with a debit card are debited from the checking
account.

Checking accounts generally offer zero interest rate, though in
regions of high month-over-month inflation they may offer a small
interest rate. Checking accounts may come with fees that might be
waived if a minimum account balance is maintained.

### Two reasons it's important to not have too much money in a checking account

There are two reasons you shouldn't put a lot of money in your
checking account.

1. Money in a checking account is more "exposed": Anybody who gets
   access to your debit card number can defraud you of all the money
   in your checking account. You will likely be able to reverse the
   transactions by calling your bank, but it could still inconvenience
   you.

   Somewhat relatedly, in addition to hackers, your impulsive avatars
   also have easier access to the money in your checking account.

2. Money in a checking account does not earn (much) interest and has a
   very poor return on investment: If you put a significant amount of
   money in your checking account, you're probably forgoing a bunch of
   interest

### Two reasons it's important to not have too little money in a checking account

1. If you have too little money in your checking account, you may not
   have ready access to money for daily life needs or to address
   emergencies. Also, having too little money in your checking account
   may result in an accidental overdraft. Overdrafts can result in
   additional fees.

2. In some cases, there may be minimum account balance requirements
   that require some minimum amount of money in the bank account.

### Suggested drawdown cycle for checking accounts

Below is the approach I follow and my suggestion.

1. Set a goal for a minimum amount of money that you'll keep in your
   checking amount.

2. If you're paid regularly (e.g., semimonthly), have the payment
   automatically credited to your checking account.

3. Use your checking account to make your payments.

4. If your checking account seems set to go below your minimum before
   your next pay, replenish the money from your savings account or
   another high-yield account.

5. If, *right before* your next pay period, you have more money in
   your checking account than the minimum amount of money, transfer
   the excess amount to an account that yields more (such as a savings
   account, or an index fund).

For instance, let's say you decide that the minimum amount in your
checking account should be $2,000. You start off with $2,000. Let's
say your pay after taxes is $1,000. So after receiving your pay, your
checking account balance is $2,000 + $1,000 = $3,000. Let's say you
spend $250 before your next pay is due. Then, you have $2,750 right
before your next pay is due, which is $750 over and above the minimum
amount. So move that $750 to a higher-yield account.

A few further thoughts:

* For major expenses that don't happen on every pay period, it may be
  better to account for them separately, either through a separate
  [sinking
  fund](https://time.com/personal-finance/article/sinking-fund/) or
  just by earmarking some buffer for them. I'll talk more about these
  major expenses further down.

* One good thing about this system is that if for some reason, you
  forget or don't get time to execute step 5, that's fine -- you just
  have a little extra money in your checking account but it doesn't
  get in the way of anything. So this system is robust to forgetting
  or not having time; the most you lose is a small amount of interest.

* If you are consistently drawing down to below your minimum amount,
  that means your expenses exceed your income, and you may need to
  rethink your expenses or your income.

* One way to think about how to set your target for minimum balance
  is: how many months of runway do you want? In the example I
  provided, with $2,000 mininimum balance, $250 expenses, and $1,000
  income, the $2,000 can cover $2,000 / $250 = 8 pay periods. That
  means that your "runway" is 8 pay periods. If pay is semimonthly,
  that means that you're covered for about 4 months.

* The exact numbers may vary from person to person. But they shouldn't
  fluctuate much for a specific person who receives a fixed amount at
  a fixed cadence. So you can figure this out one-time and then not
  think about it much.

* If you do *not* have a regular periodic pay, but your pay fluctuates
  quite a bit, it's probably better to have an additional buffer
  beyond your minimum balance when you transfer money out. For
  instance, if your target minimum balance is $2,000, you make $1,000,
  and you spend $250, you are at $2,750. But rather than transfer all
  the $750 out, you may want to keep a buffer of (let's say) $500, to
  cover an additional two months of uncertainty in when you receive
  your payment. Which means that you transfer out only $750 - $500 =
  $250.

### Notifications for checking account

It's important to have a robust system of notifications for
transactions on your checking account. Banks generally provide a bunch
of options for notification. Some of the options that may be worth
turning on:

* Balance threshold alerts: Alert if the balance falls below your
  minimum threshold. Receiving such an alert will allow you to
  replenish your checking accout if needed.

* Periodic balance alerts: Send the balance periodically. I've
  configured this to weekly, which is frequent enough that, along with
  the other alerting, I no longer feel the need to regularly log in to
  my account too check my balance. But it's also infrequent enough
  that it doesn't clog my inbox.

* Transaction alerts: Alert for all transactions, or for a subset of
  transactions, based on:

  * Amount of money spent in the transaction: For instance, any
    transaction for more than some threshold, such as $50.

  * Format of the transaction: For instance, for a debit card, it may
    help to notify for card-not-present transactions. That's because
    for card-present transactions, they generally won't happen unless
    you lose your card. On the other hand, card-not-present
    transactions could occur through some leakage of your debit card
    number.

Banks may offer the option of providing the notifications via email,
SMS, or both. Depending on your phone plan, SMS alerts may cost a bit
more; they may also be more disruptive to your workflow. In my case, I
check email way more often than SMS, and my phone plan does impose a
monthly limit on SMS messages (albeit a very generous one) so I've
configured things to send alerts somewhat more generously for email
than for SMS.
