# Miscellaneous thoughts on handling a stressful life

I've had several stressful periods in my life, where I was working
very hard and felt overwhelmed. I anticipate that some of the
conditions that led to me having to work very hard are happening again
and likely to happen for the next few months. As much as possible, I
want to avoid the feeling of overwhelm, and cope with the challenges
in my way as well as possible.

I decided to write some of my heuristics, and thought I might as well
make it public. I'm no expert on this topic, so this is not medical
advice, and it may not be suited to people in situations very
different from mine.

I'm going to use simple language and also leave a lot of what I say
unjustified. I'll probably fail to give credit to people (on and off
LessWrong, from recent history or ancient history) who thought of
these things before I do. Think of this not as an exercise in
persuasion but as a snapshot of my thoughts.

## Listening to the cognitive basis of one's stresses

One of the common responses to a feeling of stress or anxiety is to
try to calm it down, to smooth it out, or to suppress it. For
instance, if one part of your mind is saying "what if I mess up this
presentation?" the suppressing counter-narrative would be "you won't
mess up this presentation!"

I've found that suppressing stresses is not the best way of dealing
with them, even if it's effective at achieving tthe short-term
goal. And that's for two reasons: (a) the issue isn't resolved, so it
could recur, and (b) if the stress was conveying real information,
suppressing the stress destroys the information.

If you're super-agitated due to an anxiety, some initial amount of
calming may be needed to get out of that super-agitated state, but
once you can think somewhat coolly, engaging the anxiety is better,
Being charitable to one's anxieties and [using principles of
negotiation](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/CRAzG386t3suSqDgd/chris-voss-negotiation-masterclass-review)
to draw out what's driving them is helpful.

### Being prepared to accept or reject the underlying claim that's making you anxious

If you're stressed that "maybe I'm not prepared enough to give this
presentation" then the exploration of that concern should have a
[litany of Tarski
flavor](https://www.lesswrong.com/tag/litany-of-tarski) to it: "if I'm
not prepared to give this presentation, I want to conclude that I'm
not prepared to give this presentation; if I am prepared to give this
presentation, I want to conclude that I am prepared to give this
presentation." In most cases, neither outcome would be catastrophic,
but there can still be a lot of anxiety and second-guessing of oneself
and desire to reach specific conclusions. I found that coming with an
open mind helps me explore the decision-making better and also feel
more justified confidence in my decisions.

NOTE: It's probably important to strip out hyperbole surrounding the
claim before digging into it. For instance, "maybe I'm not prepared
enough to give this presentation" could be hyperbolically exaggerated
or made overly specific to something such as "maybe I'm too stupid to
give the presentation" or "maybe everybody will laugh me out of the
room whe I give the presentation." Pick the most steelmanned version
of the claim that is most worth addressing.

## Overwork or underfun: too much or too little?

Having to work very hard over some time periods can be difficult and
fatiguing for broadly two reasons: too much work, or too little
fun. Going beyond the work/fun, this applies more generally: too much
of one activity crowds out other activities.

The simple solution of "take a break, have some fun" can *often* work,
but many versions of it could be impractical precisely in the
situation of maximal stress. For instance, if you're working hard
because you have a lot that needs to be done on tight deadlines, "take
a break, have some fun" may just not be practical advice. Or at any
rate, you may be severely limited in how much "break" and "fun" you
can have without falling behind even further on work.

What I've found helpful in such situations is to understand what is
overwhelming me -- whether it's the overwork or the underfun part. In
many cases, I've found that the underfun part is easier to
address. For instance, I've found that I've had so little "fun" (I'm
using the term loosely here to refer to the sorts of activities
crowded out by work) that even an extra 30 minutes of fun could
dramatically increase my number of fun minutes while barely making a
dent in my work. This kind of realization is very useful in cases
where longer breaks aren't practical, and it's often helped me refresh
myself and get through difficult work times.

On the other hand, there are also situations where the blocker really
*is* overwork. If a few hours of fun don't make me feel more relaxed,
that's probably what's going on. For these kinds of situations,
investing extra in long-term efforts to reduce the ongoing burden of
work may be better than taking a break to have fun.

## Past, present, and future