In this document, I attempt to discuss the impact of the coronavirus
lockdown and how to prepare for it. This is not focused on the direct
impact of coronavirus, but rather on the secondary impact of
precautions that people are taking.

I'll try to update this regularly for the next few weeks, but please
keep in mind that the document may get out of date on specifics.

## General ideas

* Expect a 2-3 month timeline for the lockdown, with the
  possibility of a 6-month, 12-month, or even 18-month lockdown. Even
  if a strict lockdown lasts much less, health advice may still
  recommend that you shelter in place for additional time.

* Brace for impact! Prepare psychologically. I'd say plan for a median
  estimate of two to three months of lockdown; it could be shorter,
  but it could also be much longer. If you overprepare a little bit
  because the lockdown lasts just one month, you'll need to write off
  the effort, but that'll be less painful than forming expectations
  that this will end in a few weeks and then constantly being
  disappointed at how much it's dragging out.
  * It's ideal if all your concrete actions are "no-regret" -- so that
    if the lockdown lasts longer or shorter than you expect, the
    action still gives you some lasting benefit. But this may not
    always be possible.

* Keep a buffer (material goods, liquid savings, other reserves), but
  don't engage in panic actions to build buffers.

## Impact on day-to-day life experience

Since we're talking of a 2-3 month timeline for a lockdown (and
possibly much longer), you have to think of a sustainable way to
manage your life. It's not a day or two that you can somehow
brute-force. Here are some ideas:

* Strike the right balance in terms of going out: It's reasonably safe
  to go out if you stay far from people and don't touch stuff. So,
  make sure to get a reasonable amount of exercise and fresh
  air. Don't stay cooped up in your home for days. Obviously,
  exceptions apply for people who are sick or may have been exposed,
  or if there is legal enforcement of a stricter stay-at-home
  order. Most existing stay-at-home orders, even the strictest
  lockdowns, allow people to go out alone for exercise.

* Get the right cadence in terms of purchasing food and necessities:
  Keep in mind that grocery stores and convenience stores are limiting
  the amount you can buy at a given time. So make sure to make regular
  (though not very frequent) trips to stay stocked up on necessities,
  thinking as far ahead as feasible. Sanitize well before and after
  such trips. If you can make these trips at a time when the stores
  and streets are less crowded, please do that. Again, please make
  sure to comply with any stay-at-home orders, including taking
  appropriate documentation in regions where documentation is
  necessary.

* Take great care of your health even outside of coronavirus-related
  matters: It'll be a terrible idea if you need to go to a doctor at
  this time. So, make sure to take good care of your health,
  particularly dental health and any other aspects of health that tend
  to be problematic for you. Make sure to eat healthy and take your
  normal supplements that have a good track record for you.

* If you use paper goods at home (such as paper towels), consider
  using cloth-based substitutes, as long as each person can use their
  own personal cloth: Paper goods are likely to stay in shortage, so
  you want to use yours sparingly if feasible. For instance, use cloth
  towels instead of paper towels for wiping your hands, as long as
  multiple people aren't sharing the same towel.

## Impact on social life and interaction

Staying at home, and refraining from participating in social
activities, is something that could get harder and harder as the time
period gets longer. Some social activities are easy to forgo for a
week, but harder to forgo for two months. I expect that this could
lead to people feeling depression, loneliness, and mental health
issues, with the risks increasing the longer this continues.

A silver lining is that the reduced level of necessary activity, in
particular commuting, may help people recover from months or even
years of hectic commutes.

The balance of these factors will vary from person to person, but I
expect that for most people, the social life impact will be a net
negative.

What can we do? Here are a few thoughts:

* Exploit the positives: You can't do some social activities that you
  normally do, but perhaps the shelter-in-place and the saved commute
  time gives you more flexibility and time to do some other things
  you've always wanted to do but never had the bandwidth for. For
  instance, maybe you can spend evenings working on a long-deferred
  personal project, or learn a new skill, instead of being stuck in
  the commute or socially pressured to attend events you don't really
  enjoy. Or maybe you could spend more time with your family (in the
  literal sense, not as a euphemism). Or spend more time online with
  people who don't live near you anyway.

* Get along better with the people you live with: You can't escape
  your home to go hang out with others, so you probably need to make
  peace with whoever is next to you, whether that's your family, your
  pets, or random roommates. Appreciate more the time you spend with
  them (with appropriate social distance!) or at any rate, don't get
  into fights, considering that you can't walk out of the house that
  easily.

* Switch social activities online as much as possible, and plan a
  little bit for them: If you got a lot of your social energy from
  serendipitious in-person interaction, this will be in short
  supply. Instead, you may have to plan the equivalent online things a
  bit more. In many cases, more conscious planning and coordination
  may be needed. So make sure to plan and push for the online
  equivalents where feasible. This is important because it's likely
  the lockdown will last long enough. This may be particularly
  important for group activities that play an important role providing
  emotional support to their members.

## Impact on work life and job security

This mostly applies to jobs where you were previously going into an
office and you're now working from home. It doesn't apply to cases
where you have been fired or furloughed, or where you were always
working from home, or where you still need to go in for the job.

* Make home station adjustments: Make adjustments to your home
  environment to make it more feasible to efficiently work from
  home. A lot of people find it helpful to have a physical separation
  of their work station and the rest of their home; if that's feasible
  and desirable for you, consider doing it.

* Negotiate a new work-life balance: The previous work-life balance
  you worked out probably needs to be adjusted in light of the new
  situation. For instance, perhaps you can start work earlier and end
  later, but need more breaks within the day because the grocery store
  closes earlier so you need to shop during the day. Think through the
  right balance that works for you and your employer. This may take a
  few days to figure out.

* Make sure lines of communication and recognition of your work have
  adjusted to the work-from-home reality: Even if you're doing just as
  much work as you were doing in the past, your boss or colleagues may
  not realize that. Make sure that the "optics" angle is
  well-covered. The specifics will vary from job to job.

* Keep in mind that getting a new job may be harder, so try to secure
  yourself in your existing job more: At least until the lockdown is
  in place, and possibly even for a few more months, switching jobs
  will be hard. So, try as much as possible to get along with your
  existing job. This is true even if your industry isn't directly
  affected in a severe way; for people in industries that are heavily
  affected, the situation is much trickier. NOTE: If you are in a
  heavily affected industry and have an opportuunity to jump to a less
  affected one, consider taking it. But secure the new opportunity
  first before jumping ship.

## Financial impact

* Give more importance to building a liquid savings buffer. In my
  [simple financial advice
  doc](https://github.com/vipulnaik/working-drafts/tree/master/simple-financial-advice.md),
  I recommend building liquid savings for about one year. In the
  current climate, I recommend increasing the target to two years,
  and to three if your job or industry is particularly negatively
  affected.
* In particular, I suggest:
  * Stop contributing to retirement accounts until you have hit the
    increased liquid savings threshold. With that said, if you do have
    more liquid savings than the increased threshold, increasing
    contributions to retirement accounts may be a great idea.
  * Hold off on repaying very-low-interest loans such as student loans
    until you have hit the increased liquid savings threshold (though
    it's best to do calculations for each loan to trade off the
    interest rate against the loss of liquidity).
  * If you are well below your liquid savings threshold, investigate
    how much of your money is in retirement accounts and other funds
    and make contingency plans to liquidate some of it to shore up
    your liquid savings. Liquidating retirement accounts may come with
    a penalty, which is why it's better to store any new money you're
    getting in more liquid forms. So make the plan and be prepared to
    execute it if you find your net savings rate turning negative (due
    to unexpected income loss or expense increases).
* Beyond the goal of maintaining liquidity to weather you through 2 to
  3 years, don't engage in panic buying or selling of assets. In
  relative terms, the stock market may be a good buy right now and
  putting money there could be a good idea if you expect that you
  won't need to take money out for the next 2 to 3 years. That's why
  the first priority should be to build a liquid savings buffer for
  the next 2 to 3 years.
* On a similar note, if you engage in regular philanthropy or in
  consumer spending that gives you happiness, continue with it as long
  as (a) it still makes sense in the context of the lockdown, and (b)
  you either already reached or are on the way to your liquid savings
  threshold. In other words, after securing your health and wealth,
  continue your life as close to normal as possible.
  * If, for building your savings, you have a choice between cutting
    down on consumer spending that gives you happiness, versus cutting
    down on putting money into retirement accounts, choose the
    latter. In other words, spend normally, and put less money into
    your retirement account. Saving for retirement can wait for a few
    years; if you don't survive those few years, there is no point
    saving for retirement.
