# Preventing and minimizing collision injury

Over the past few years, I've been trying to collect a bunch of
principles and ideas around how to prevent and minimize injury to
person and to material stuff.

In this article, I lay out principles centered around injury through
collisions; for instance, falling on the floor, bumping into
something, dropping an object to the floor, etc. Collisions cause
injury because the kinetic energy of the colliding objects is rapidly
converted to other forms of energy over a short period of time,
resulting in a huge amount of force. Further, if the force is targeted
to a very small surface area, this also means a huge amount of
pressure on the area.

While some of these principles also apply to some aspects of other
kinds of injuries, such as burns, there are additional angles to
avoiding burns, which we don't discuss here.

Sections of this document:

* Speed
* Height of drop (particularly relevant for phone drops)
* Surfaces: give and smoothness (for injury at the point of impact)
* Surfaces: slipperiness and trip risk
* Holding to prevent drops
* Posture when falling
* Blind spots
* Safety margins

## Speed

### Context where we might talk of speed

We might talk of speed in several different contexts:

* Speed of a person moving (crawling, walking, running)

* Speed of an object being thrown or dropped (for a dropped object,
  speed is a function of the height it has fallen; more on this later)

* Speed of a vehicle carrying people, often including the driver or
  controller of the vehicle

### How speed matters

#### Speed matters for preventing collisions due to limitations on how fast you can decelerate: lower is better

As a general rule, the lower the speed, the less likely a
collision. The simple reason has to do with *stopping time* and
*stopping distance*. In general, there is an upper limit on how fast
you can decelerate. For instance, for brakes in vehicles that run on
wheels, the mechanism of braking is limited by friction, so it's the
coefficient of friction times the acceleration due to gravity.

If your current speed is *v* and your maximum deceleration
(magnitude) is *a* the time it takes you to stop is *v/a*. Therefore,
holding *a* constant, the time it takes you to stop grows linearly
with your speed. So, doubling your speed doubles the time it takes you
to stop.

However, that's not the worst of it. The *distance* it takes you to
stop is *v^2/2a*, so it grows quadratically in your speed. In other
words, doubling your speed, quadruples your stopping distance. In the
context of vehicles, this is also called [braking
distance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Braking_distance).

Why does stopping distance / braking distance matter? If you see a
brick wall in front of you, braking distance basically answers the
question of how far the brick wall has to be when you start braking,
for you to brake before hitting it.

#### Speed matters for minimizing the impact of collisions: lower is better

Even if a collision does happen, the speed at the time of collision is
crucial in determining the extent of damage. At the extreme, a
collision at literally zero speed creates no injury, and wouldn't even
properly be called a collision!

Mathematically, the kinetic energy (formula *(1/2)mv^2*) is
proportional to the *square* of the speed. So the energy released
during the collision grows quadratically with the speed. Roughly
speaking, therefore, the damage from the collision also grows
quadratically with the speed.

#### High speed uses up physical and cognitive resources that may make it harder to react to situational changes

This one can vary based on context. For a living thing moving using
its own power, it's probably true in most cases: the faster the
movement, the more of the living thing's cognitive and physical
resources are spent supporting the motion, and the less resources
there are to react to situational changes. Imagine if you're running
super-fast versus walking: in the former case, you probably can't
think or process information that well.

This applies less in cases where the motion is not powered directly by
the controller -- for instance, when driving a motor vehicle.

#### High speed makes sensory processing more challenging

For many kinds of sensory inputs, they are harder to process when
moving faster. For instance, it's harder to identify objects and read
text when moving faster. This is likely not too relevant for the
speeds that humans can achieve by crawling, walking, and running, but
becomes more relevant when driving a motor vehicle.

#### When somebody hits you from behind, though, higher speed could be better

While lower is better when you're the one hitting stationary things
(like the ground or a brick wall), higher speed is better when
something is hitting you from behind. For one thing, the higher your
speed, the more likely you are to avoid being hit from behind by
whatever's chasing you. For another, when there's a collision of two
moving objects, it's the relative speeds that matter for the energy
release in the collision.

### How to use the insight that speed matters

* In general, keep low speed to prevent and minimize the impact of
  collisions, except in contexts where there are things behind you
  that could collide with you. In that latter case, make sure to
  maintain a speed similar to the things behind you.

* Reduce speed in the presence of other factors that either increase
  the probability of collisions or increase the impact of collisions
  if they were to happen. We'll talk more about some of these other
  factors later in the article. A few worth mentioning: approaching
  corners or intersections, slippery surfaces (where the coefficient
  of friction is lower, that therefore reduces the deceleration that
  braking can achieve), poor visibility (that reduces the sighting
  distance, thereby reducing the safety margin between sighting
  distance and braking distance).

## Height of drop (particularly relevant for dropping phones)

Dropping objects is one way they get injured -- they hit the ground /
floor with a high speed, creating a collision and hence an
injury. This is particularly relevant for electronics that are
frequently used, like phones.

The term "drop" specifically means that the object being dropped had
zero speed in the vertical direction at the time it was let go -- if
it was thrown with positive speed doward, the term would be "throw".

### The energy is directly proportional to the height of drop

Some basic classical mechanics here: a drop through a height *h* for a
mass *m* converts a total amount *mgh* of potential energy into
kinetic energy. The energy at the point of collision with a fixed,
stationary floor or ground is therefore *mgh*, so it's directly
proportional to *h*. Another way to think about it is that the speed
is proportional to the square root of the height, and the energy is
proportional to the square of the speed, so the square and square root
cancel, and we're left with direct proportionality.

This means that dropping from twice the height generates twice the
energy, and has the potential to do twice the damage, roughly
speaking.

### How to use the insight that height matters

#### Keeping heights low

The "height" here is the height relative to the thing the object gets
dropped on. Here are a few examples of this:

* Height of zero: Putting the phone on a table when working on it,
  means it effectively has a height of zero relative to the
  table. Similarly, keeping the phone on the ground when it's
  connected to a charging cable near ground level means that even if
  the phone gets pulled when the cable is yanked, it has nowhere to
  drop to.

* Supporting surface below: Sometimes you need to hold a phone in your
  hand, so that there's a bit more of a risk of dropping (for
  instance, when taking a photo, or doing some manipulations). Even in
  such cases, having a surface just slightly below where you're
  holding it, which the phone would drop onto if you lose your grip,
  is better than having it drop all the way to the floor. For
  instance, when using the phone while working, even when I need to
  take the phone in my hand, I try to do so above the table (which is
  less than one foot below) so that the drop is limited to one
  foot. If there's no supporting table, and I'm seated, I might use my
  lap as the supporting surface.

  Similarly, when I am outdoors, and using my phone, I often look for
  elevated surfaces that I can use as support below my phone.

* Posture: Being in a seated posture when using the phone reduces its
  height (while also providing a supporting surface, the lap). Holding
  the phone at belly/chest level rather than eye level further reduces
  its height.

#### Adjusting other risk factors along with height

The idea here is to take more care of height when other factors, such
as surfaces, are against us. For instance, I care more about the
height of my phone when outdoors on the road or on a concrete
sidewalk, than I do indoors at home.

## Surfaces: give and smoothness (for injury at the point of impact)

### Surfaces differ a lot in how dangerous they are to collide with

Consider falling or dropping something on these four kinds of surfaces:

* A mattress
* A carpeted floor
* A hardwood floor
* A sidewalk concrete slab
* A road

For a fall with the same speed, the amount of damage is expected to go
up as you go down this list. Some of these observations are very
obvious.

There are a couple of reasons for this.

#### Surfaces vary in their "give"

The "give" of the surface: A surface with more "give" is one that
doesn't immediately try to stop the object -- rather, it slows it down
gradually. The "gradually" can still be less than a second, but it's
long enough that the peak deceleration is relatively lower, so that
the force exerted on the object being stopped is smaller.

A mattress is a relatively extreme example of high give: when you drop
something on a mattress, the mattress doesn't immediately stop it, but
instead, allows the object to continue moving into the mattress, and
compresses a little bit to allow for that motion.

Similarly, carpeted floors have less give than mattresses, but still a
decent amount. You can often see temporary dents in carpets from
objects pressing against them, showing the give of the carpet.

#### Surfaces vary in their smoothness (or in reverse, their microscopic sharpness)

A polished hardwood floor is relatively smooth compared to a sidewalk
concrete slab. The concrete has a lot of little poky points, that
generate high pressure on the specific places that hit those
points. That's why phones tend to get more damaged when dropped on
concrete than on a hardwood floor from the same height and at the same
angle; see
[here](https://www.reddit.com/r/engineering/comments/86wb72/help_settle_a_debate_with_my_roommates_is_a_phone/)
for instance. (The comments there suggest that wood does also have
more give than concrete, but the microsopic sharpness is the bigger
factor.

Roads are much worse even than sidewalk concrete slabs, so falling or
dropping your phone on the road is often worse.

If you don't want to drop your phone around to verify this, another
way to collect data on this is to try to walk without shoes on the
different surfaces. You'll generally find that polished hardwood is
comfortable to walk on; many home floors are polished hardwood and
people walk on them all day. Sidewalk concrete is unpleasant -- you'll
feel things poking at your feet. The road is much worse.

#### Beware of sharp edges at transition points

In some cases, the concrete slabs that make up a sidewalk don't
perfectly align with one another, or aren't laid out perfectly
horizontally, so there are sharp edges at the transition point between
slabs. These can both increase the risk of tripping and falling (a
subject for a later section) and cause more injury if you do fall onto
them.

#### Sharp debris can make matters worse

Outdoor sidewalks and roads also pose the risk of debris from other
people having dropped or discarded stuff. A classic hazard is smashed
glass bottles. The shards of glass are particularly dangerous to fall
onto. Tree branches can also poke, though not as badly as glass.

Some other debris can be protective in case of falls or drops, though,
such as leaves that fall in copious amounts during the autumn/fall
season; however, this may increase the risk of slipperiness.

### How to use the insight that surfaces matter

#### Avoid the riskiest surfaces

For instance, steer clear of areas with glass debris.

#### Adjust speed and other risk factors based on surfaces

For instance, don't go superfast on roads, and don't go superfast on
concrete, because injury on these surfaces can be bad. Go only at the
speed that you're comfortable falling at.

#### Use your phone in the lower-risk settings

I generally prefer to use my phone indoors rather than outdoors, as
the indoor surfaces (floor, tables) are better in terms of give and
smoothness than outdoor surfaces. Even when not at home, for instance,
when out shopping, I might only use my phone when I am inside the
store, even if I remember something necessitating phone use when I am
outdoors

When outdoors, where possible, I prefer to use my phone over grass
areas near concrete sidewalks than over the concrete sidewalks
themselves, because the grass surfaces have more give; soil generally
has more give than concrete, but more importantly, the grass provides
an early deceleration and protects the phone from contact with the
soil (with that said, grass can be more messy to interact with, so
that's a downside). I also try hard to avoid using the phone when on
road -- the sidewalk is better (it's also generally a bad idea to be
on the phone while on a road where vehicles might collide with you).

## Surfaces: slipperiness and trip risk

Unlike the give and smoothness, that are about the extent of injury
once the collision happens, slipperiness and trip risk are about the
risk of starting to fall in the first place.

### Uneven surfaces create a risk of tripping

This is particularly relevant for unseen unevenness.

For instance, concrete slabs that aren't aligned.

Debris that you trip over.

### Slipperiness

Surfaces that are very smooth and slippery, particularly in unexpected
ways (interesting because smoothness reduces injury once you fall, but
too much smoothness can increase the risk of falling).

#### Wetness

Wetter is slipperier.

#### Soapiness

Normal rain wetness is bad but soapy wetness, that happens e.g., when
somebody has been mopping or cleaning the area, is worse. This is
particularly relevant for high-traffic indoor areas such as railway
stations or airports, but it may also apply to some outdoor areas.

If you see an area that seems wet despite lack of recent rain or
sprinklers, and if you see some cleaning equipment nearby, be
particularly cautious. Try to avoid stepping into it.

## Holding to prevent drops

### Holding basics

For most things, when holding them, we rely on two forces: normal
force, which acts perpendicular to the contact plane, and friction
force, which acts parallel to the contact plane.

When holding, we have two goals. One is to counteract the force of
gravity that would make the object fall down otherwise. Another is to
move or manipulate the object (for instance, carry it along as we
move, or rotate it or press buttons or thing like that).

### How to counteract gravity

We can counteract gravity by relying on some mix of the normal force
and friction force. Holding *from below* means we are relying
primarily on the normal force to counteract gravity. Holding *from the
side* means that we are primarily relying on friction to counteract
gravity.

The gotcha with the use of friction is that it's sensitive to the
coefficient of friction. This can vary between objects, and even vary
for the same object based on factors such as how wet our hands are, or
whether we have sand or dust on our hands. This means that there's
more of a risk of miscalculation with friction: you forget that your
hands are wet, and you don't grip the object as hard as you should, so
it slips. On the other hand, when using normal force, you just need to
apply enough force to counteract gravity, so as long as you have a
sense for how heavy the object is, you'll be right.

### Holding from multiple directions

Still, *just* holding from below is dangerous. For instance, holding a
phone flat on your hand, without gripping it on the side, means that
if you tilt your hand slightly, the phone could slip off.

So a better approach is to hold it mainly from below, but also support
it from the sides. Now, if your hand tilts a little bit, part of
gravity pushes on one of the sides you are holding at, so just
increasing the normal force you apply from that side as well will help
counteract gravity.

## Posture when falling

### For electronics

In general, a "closed" configuration is better, and there's generally
one side that is safer to fall into.

For instance, a laptop is much less likely to get damaged from a fall
if the lid has been closed, and if it falls in its base.

A phone is less likely to get damaged if it falls on its back rather
than on its front or side.

### For humans

Falling on the arms is better than falling on the hands.

See e.g. [this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o_he-KVCIkY).

## Blind spots

### Vehicle blind spots

### Corners

## Safety margins

### How far from the edge of a table or countertop to place stuff

It should be far enough that a sweeping or toppling motion can be
arrested or still won't cause the stuff to drop off the table.
