# Steady states and crunch times

In this blog post, I describe two related concepts in the context of
one's personal life and the balance of various pieces in that life.

I use the term *steady state* for a general pattern of balance that a
person opts into for an extended period of time, between various
aspects in the person's life. These aspects may incllude things such
as work, diet, exercise, relationships, creative expression, and
relaxation/entertainment. I describe this in more detail in the next
section.

I use the term *crunch time* for a period in a person's life when the
person deviates significantly from the steady state prior to that
deviation, for reasons that seem justified to the person. A crunch
time may occur for many reasons such as a health issue, a deadline at
work, a life transition (such as a job loss or job change, moving
houses, getting into or out of a relationship, or having kids), or
major social upheaval (such as the COVID-19 pandemic and the
significant increase in social distancing as a result).

This post covers thoughts on what crunch times look like, how to
navigate it, and what the process of returning to steady state looks
like.

## Steady states

A steady state represents a balance between various aspects of a
person's life, as determined by the person based on that person's
situation and values. The balance should be sustainable at least in
the medium term (e.g., several months to several years).

### Various aspects in a steady state

The list of categories below is not intended to be comprehensive, but
merely to be illustrative of the kinds of things that need to be
balanced in a steady state.

* **Work**: The person's quantity and nature of work are at a level
  sustainable for a reasonably long period of time (such as several
  months to several years)

* **Diet**: The person's diet is a sustainable compromise after taking
  into account such factors as health and nutrition, desired body
  shape and size, taste, financial cost, time cost (of purchase and
  preparation), and ethics.

* **Exercise**: The person's physical (and mental) exercise level is a
  sustainable compromise after taking into account such factors as
  overall health, desired body shape and size, financial cost of
  exercise equipment, weather conditions (that might affect the
  ability to do certain kinds of physical exercise), and time cost of
  exercise.

* **Relationships**: The person's quality and quantity of time and energy
  devoted to relationships important to the person is sustainable:
  it's not so little as to jeopardize the relationship and not so much
  as to eat into other things.

* **Creative expression**: The person feel enough freedom, in terms of
  both time and other resources, to express creative thoughts, whether
  as blog posts, or poems, or paintings, or music.

* **Social interaction**: The person's social interaction is within a
  range that is a reasonable compromise given the social needs of the
  communities the person wants to be part of, the person's own social
  needs, and the financial cost and time cost of the social
  interaction.

* **Relaxation/entertainment**: The person is able to achieve a sustainable
  compromise in terms of the time and type of
  relaxation/entertainment, after considering things like financial
  cost and time cost.

The items in the list are not necessarily mutually exclusive. For
instance, some people's work may include a lot of exercise, and many
people's work may include creative expression and social interaction
on a regular basis. For people who are engaged in creative
collaboration with their close friends, the categories of
relationships, creative expression, and social interaction might
overlap. For people who feel relaxed by social interaction, the
categories of social interaction and relaxation/entertainment overlap.

### Steady state as a psychological feeling more than any universal threshold

Two different people in steady state may choose to balance the various
aspects of life completely differently from each other. Even the same
person may choose very different balances at different points in
life. For instance, one person may work four hours a week and spend
the rest of the time with family; another may be a workaholic and do
maintenance levels of other activities.

The key distinguishing factor of a steady state is psychological: the
person doesn't legitimately feel something like: "Oh, let me delay
figuring this out by another two months because life will be more
balanced by then."

## Crunch times

A crunch time is a period in a person's life when the person deviates
significantly from the steady state prior to that deviation, for
reasons that seem justified to the person. So, this is not just about
a person randomly losing a sense of discipline in life and becoming
more careless about diet or exercise; this is about some concrete
thing going on due to which the person legitimately feels that the
balance created in the previous steady state is untenable.

### The new steady state may or may not be similar to the old steady state

The steady state that the person arrives at after the crunch time may
be pretty similar to the person's old steady state, or it may be
something very different. What the case is depends on the nature of
the change in the person's life.

For instance, if a person is switching jobs or houses, but the new
job/house is qualitatively similar to the old job/house in the
relevant ways, then the new steady state may be very similar to the
old steady state. So the crunch time is just a temporary deviation
from a mostly unchanged steady state. For instance, for a house move,
the period of the move may be one where the person eats out more and
exercises less, because of logistical challenges with eating at home
and exercising. But once the move is completed, the person may be able
to revert to the old diet and exercise pattern.

On the other hand, some transitions result in having to rethink the
steady state. Some examples: getting a chronic health ailment, having
a kid, or starting a job that is qualitatively different from the old
one, or moving to a very different kind of place (for instance, moving
from a dense urban area to a sparse rural area). In such cases, there
is both a crunch time associated with the transition, as well as a
longer-term recalibration of steady state, that often happens in
parallel. Even though both happen in parallel, it may be helpful to
conceptually distinguish the two, so as not to let the transitional
crunch be a factor in deciding the new steady state.

### Intensity and duration of crunch times

Crunch times can vary in their intensity (how severely they deviate
from the steady state) and duration (how long they last). While it's
possible to have crunch times that are severe in intensity and long in
duration, this is relatively rare; in general, there is an
intensity/duration trade-off.

At the one extreme are acute crunch times that may last less than a
week, but are very intense for that week. At the other extreme are
extended crunch times that last several months, but require relatively
smaller deviation from steady state.

Some crunch times are a superposition of acute and extended: there is
a relatively acute peak period of high intensity and short duration,
and a longer period of slight deviation from steady state. For
instance, for a house move, the week of the actual physical move is
the acute period, whereas the weeks before and after that, involving
changing addresses, setting up services, buying extra stuff to furnish
the new place, getting rid of junk from the old place, etc. correspond
to the more extended but less intense portion.

### Example causes of crunch times

Here are some possible causes of crunch times:

* **Sickness and health issues**: Sometimes, people experience
  physical and mental health issues that reduce their *total
  capacity*, so the balance that made sense previously needs to be
  rethought. The health issue may be temporary (for instance, an
  infectious disease with an approximately known recovery timeline) or
  chronic or unclear. Even in the chronic case, the period immediately
  following having the issue will be different from the longer term:
  the initial period will likely be heavy on diagnosis effort and
  experimentation with treatments and palliative remedies.

* **Deadline at work**: Sometimes, there are crunches associated with
  one's day job. These crunches could mean a need to work overtime, or
  to put in a greater quality of focus at work, for a brief period of
  time. This means that at least for that period of time, the person
  has less capacity for other aspects of life.

* **Sudden job loss**: A job loss (for instance, getting terminated
  from a job, or one's employer shutting down) can be a crunch time
  for several reasons. First, a lot of effort may need to be directed
  to the search for another job. Second, the financial calculus may
  change significantly, necessitating changes to various other
  trade-offs (for instance, a reduction in eating out, a reduction in
  some forms of expensive entertainment, perhaps a change to one's
  living situation to cut down on housing costs). Third, in some cases
  the job loss could have an emotional impact, depending on the exact
  circumstances, that might make it difficult to maintain life's
  previous balance. Fourth, there may be implications for social
  interactions and relationships.

* **Planned job change**: A planned job change can be a crunch time as
  it involves a mix of transitioning out of the old job and
  transitioning into the new job.

* **Moving houses**: A house move means a bunch of physical work
  moving things, packing and unpacking, as well as a bunch of
  logistical coordination around address changes and setting up
  services at the new house. It also involves a search process for
  stuff near the new house, such as shops, neighborhood activities,
  jogging tracks, etc.

* **Getting into a relationship**: The initial phase of getting into a
  relationship involves a bunch of learning about the other person or
  about various aspects of oneself. A bunch of time is spent with the
  other person that may leave less time for other
  activities. Moreover, there may be a discovery process of figuring
  out how to balance the preferences of the other person in the
  relationship, with one's own past trade-offs (for instance, around
  diet, if you cook and eat along with the other person).

* **Having a kid**: Having a kid has major implications for one's
  lifestyle, and the transitional period is a particularly crunchy
  time because of the significant adjustment needed to the physical
  space of the house as well as one's waking and sleeping routine.

## Navigating crunch times

Every crunch time is different, so not a lot can be said in full
generality about navigating crunch times. Nonetheless, I think there
are a few broad ideas that can be helpful, and I describe them below.

### Understanding preferences around intensity versus duration, to the extent these can be traded off

If you prefer a short, intense, acute crunch time, over a long and
more mild one, then you may be able to arrange things that
way. Inversely, if you prefer a long and relatively mild crunch time,
you may be able to arrange that too. For instance, for a house move,
there is an intense period of the physical move, but you have
flexibility about whether to do the other moving-related stuff at the
same time, or spread it out over a longer time period.

My own preference has been to spread crunch times over periods of up
to six weeks, except for cases where there are significant time
efficiencies of taking the acute approach.

### Setting deadlines with appropriate flexibility

There are several aspects of this:

* In some cases, if the default deadline (possibly imposed from
  outside) makes the crunch feel too intense, I request an extension
  to give me a bit more time. There is still a deadline, but it's that
  little bit more relaxed, which means that the intensity of the
  deviation from steady state is within an acceptable range. In many
  cases, the other party is happy to grant an extension, though there
  may be some financial cost to it (for instance, getting an extension
  of a few days for a house move may mean having to pay double rent
  for those extra days).

* In addition to external deadlines, it also helps to have an internal
  "return-to-steady-state-by" date; this is a date by which you expect
  to return to steady state. In my personal experience, I have found
  it helpful to have this date about one or two months after the
  planned end of the clearly identified crunch time period. What's the
  reason for that buffer? Partly, it has to do with "catching up"
  time; when the crunch time ends, I may have a bunch of catching up
  to do on things that I deferred to make way for the crunch.

  For instance, if I'm moving houses at the end of February, and
  expect to be mostly done with setup at the new place by the end of
  March, I might set my "return-to-steady-state-by" date as May 15.

* Once I have decided on a "return-to-steady-state-by" date, I try to
  make a point of trying to avoid taking on an obligation for any
  discretionary tasks (where I have flexibility) until the
  "return-to-steady-state-by" date. While I might still end up doing
  some of these discretionary tasks spontaneously, I do so only to the
  extent that are good reasons based on time-sensitivity and mood.

  For instance, if a friend is visiting from out of town and may not
  come again for several years, it is a time-sensitive situation and I
  may decide to meet up with the friend before my
  "return-to-steady-state-by" date. Or if somebody needs advice on a
  time-sensitive situation in their life, I might do so. On the other
  hand, I might not proactively reach out to old friends living in my
  town to try to arrange meetups, until after the
  "return-to-steady-state-by" date.

### Making temporary compromises on various aspects of life during the crunch time

I describe here some examples of the sorts of compromises I have made
during crunch times, and my thinking around these.

* **Diet**: During my house move, I ended up eating out more than
  usual, mostly due to logistical challenges around cooking/eating
  when my stuff was in transit, as well as the desire to not have to
  throw away food at the time of move. This was a wortwhile trade-off,
  but the frequency and type of outside food I ate at the time was not
  something I would like to continue in a steady state.

  During a crunch time at my job, I've shifted to getting more outside
  food, so that I can reduce the frequency of meal prep at home from
  once every ~4 days to once every week. The greater amount of outside
  food saved me some time, but did have a slight additional financial
  cost as well as some cost in terms of health and nutrition as well
  as taste satisfaction (I do like the outside food, but only at a
  somewhat lower frequency). This was a worthwhile trade-off all
  things considered, but not suitable as a steady state.

* **Exercise**: During my house move, I stopped explicit physical
  exercise partly for reasons of time availability, but also because
  the moving did involve a bunch of physical activity (including a lot
  of walking and a lot of carrying things), so exercising on top of
  that was fatiguing. In this case, the trade-off in terms of physical
  health was attenuated because moving itself did substitute for
  exercise. So what I missed most about exercise was the relaxed and
  low-stakes format of it, where I would be exerting my body purely
  for my body, rather than for instrumental reasons. Stopping exercise
  was therefore a decent trade-off under the circumstances but not
  good as a steady state.

* **Recordkeeping**: I didn't list recordkeeping as an aspect of
  people's lives in general, because it's not necessarily that salient
  for most people, but it is important to me. For instance, I maintain
  a record of my [daily updates](https://updates.vipulnaik.com/),
  [contract work for me](https://contractwork.vipulnaik.com/), and my
  [entertainment consumption](https://ese.vipulnaik.com/). The
  recordkeeping does not take a lot of time, but during crunch times,
  even the small amount of time they take is something I want to save.

  In these cases, my preference is to make a trade-off where I *delay*
  the recordkeeping, so that I am eventually caught up with it, rather
  than just miss out on the recordkeeping. This means that I maintain
  enough of the records that I can backfill the rest later. For
  instance, in the case of entertainment consumption, I just record a
  very minimal version of the data (name of item, start date of
  consumption, end date of consumption) from which I can fill the rest
  of the information (language, format, consumption venue, notes,
  etc.) later. I also may set limits on how significant a backlog I
  can develop for various kinds of recordkeeping, based on data
  availability considerations.

* **Cleaning / house chores**: In steady state, I do various kinds of
  house chores related to cleaning every so often. During crunch time,
  I may defer some kinds of cleaning that aren't strictly necessary
  for health and hygiene in the near term. For instance, I might still
  clean the kitchen countertops to prevent food accumulation, but I
  may defer cleaning my work desk. During crunch times, I may also
  defer rinsing bottles for recycling, something I normally do as they
  get emptied.

### Phasing normalcy back in

Rather than a binary between "crunch time" and "steady state", I
prefer to phase the steady state back into my life as the
intensity/acuteness of crunch time goes down. For instance, I might
return to steady state for some aspects (such as diet and exercise)
once the most acute period of crunch time is over, but delay the
return to steady state for other aspects, such as recordkeeping, until
a little later.

A straightforward reason for doing so is that different aspects of my
steady state have different degrees of tolerance for deviation. The
reasoning in my particular case was as follows: for diet and exercise,
deviating for more than a few weeks can start affecting my health and
habits longer-term, so I seek to return to steady state as soon as
it's feasible. For recordkeeping, deviations can happen for more
extended periods of time since catching up is feasible and at the end
of it all I will be back to normal.

Phasing normalcy back in also fits better shape-wise with having an
acute period followed by a more extended, lower-intensity period of
crunch time. The return to partial normalcy gives a psychological
sense of relief and excitement about the forthcoming *fuller* return
to normalcy.

With that said, your mileage may vary in this regard; you may prefer
to have an intense, acute crunch time and then fully return to
normalcy all at once in all aspects. This approach has the advantage
of allowing for a more definitive moment of celebration at having
returned to normal.

### Leaving some room for normalcy throughout the process

Humans can get demotivated during crunch times by having to do a bunch
of things that may not be very pleasant, and deviating a lot from
their regular routines. This demotivation can reduce their ability to
finish with the work that needs to be finished and get through the
crunch.

So, it may be important and valuable to keep a certain amount of
normalcy and maintain at least some aspects of the steady state, even
if from a pure time accounting perspective they seem less important
than the crunch. This is different from feeling *obliged* to do steady
state activities.

For instance, during crunch time, I defer the *requirement* for myself
to keep up with my usual recordkeeping, and I also defer *committing*
to doing any other non-time-sensitive projects. But sometimes I just
don't feel like doing the crunch time work, and I find that just
catching up with a bit of recordkeeping, or engaging in a small act of
creative expression, gets me back to feeling good about things, after
which I can return to crunch time work. I described a variant of this
idea in the [underfun case section of my post on handling a stressful
life](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/rBLEiEsNxpQaqwsmJ/miscellaneous-thoughts-on-handling-a-stressful-life#The_underfun_case).

### TODO list management for both the crunch time and the return to normalcy

During a crunch time, a person may not be immediately do some kinds of
tasks that the person would normally be able to do
immediately. Rather, those tasks may need to be deferred till after
the crunch time. For instance, during normal times, I might process
physical mail as soon as I receive it, but during a crunch time, I
might choose to not open non-urgent physical mail. The physical mail
accumulates until after the crunch has ended, when I clear it.

Due to this, TODO list management may change qualitatively and
quantitativey during crunch times. In addition to managing the list of
things that are being done as part of the crunch, the list may also
include a list of things that are being deferred due to the
crunch. Things that normally may not even get into TODO lists, because
they would get done immediately or on a set schedule, now need to be
put in the TODO list, queued behind crunch work.

## Figuring out a new steady state

In some cases, a transition is accompanied by a need to figure out a
new steady state as well. For instance, when switching to a very
different kind of job, or having a kid, or moving to a very different
physical environment, a person may find that the old steady state no
longer makes sense for the new environment.

### Separating the crunch time created by transition work from the "figuring out" of the new steady state

One risk is that without a clear thought process around what the new
normal should look like, it may be that the practices followed during
the crunch time of the transition period leak into the new normal. For
instance, while moving houses, a person eats out more because it's
inconvenient to cook amidst all the moving. But then the person locks
into the new habit of eating out a lot more than before, even though
there is no fundamental change in the pros and cons of eating out.

To avoid this sort of trap, it may be helpful to separate out the
decisions made for how to live *during* the crunch period, with the
decisions made for how to live after the crunch period. If the latter
set of decisions isn't super-clear, a further period for investigation
and adjustment may need to be reserved in addition to the original
crunch period. For instance, if moving houses, then in addition to the
crunch period of the actual move and related
bureaucratic/administrative items, it may make sense to reserve
another period of a few weeks to explore the neighborhood to become
more familiar with grocery stores, eateries, convenience stores,
jogging tracks, neighborhood activities, etc. The new steady state
would emerge as a result of this exploratory period.

In some cases, it's possible to multiplex between the direct
transition work and the exploratory work of figuring out the new
normal; in other cases, the crunch is strong and it makes sense to
reserve the additional period. If you're not sure of the situation in
your case, I suggest being conservative and reserving an additional
period -- it may turn out that you ultimately don't need it.

### The never-extending crunch as the de facto normal

It can also sometimes happen that sometimes starts out as a crunch,
but then it doesn't finish on time, and it extends, so you think of it
as a slightly longer crunch, but then it extends again, and again, and
again. At some point, it becomes the *de facto* new normal, but
because it didn't ever very clearly get marked as a new normal, the
person never goes through the process of figuring out the steady state
for this situation.

The vague thought I have around this is that *at some point, one has
to say that a situation has gone on long enough that it has become the
new normal, and should be treated as such, rather than as a temporary
crunch.* However, what that point is can vary from person to person
and situation to situation. It might help to think about this right at
the outset of a particular crunch, and set some kind of final deadline
by which the crunch should be gone. This is related to the
"return-to-steady-state-by" date that I previously mentioned, but may
be an even later date.

To give some concrete numbers (that are purely illustrative and may be
different in other situations), let's say you're switching jobs in end
of April/beginning of May, and you expect some wrapping up at the old
job + onboarding at the new job to mean you are in a crunch, between
the period of April and July. You set a "return-to-steady-state-by"
date of October, so you try not to sign up for additional things by
October. These dates are still tentative; onboarding at the new job
may end up taking a bit longer. But if it keeps going forever, then
that would mean a new normal! So you set a final deadline of December
by which you should be out of "crunch" mode; if things continue to be
very busy until December, then you have to accept it as the new normal
and rethink the balance between various aspects of your life in light
of how demanding the job is (which might be much more than you
originally thought it would be).
