# Subzero activities

I have often verbalized a certain class of activities as "subzero
activities" and I think this classification may interest some readers.

A "subzero activity" is an activity that I would almost never do for
its own sake, even though I may not necessarily dislike it. I might
even like it a bit. The reason I would probably never do it for its
own sake is that the value I get from doing it is less than its cost
(in time, money, or other measures) and would likely be less than its
cost even if a lot of things changed in my life (e.g., if I got much
richer, or suddenly had a lot more time available).

When some activities that people are socially expected to like is a
subzero activity for me, this can be a bit hard and awkward to
explain. Because people might infer that I hate it or am closed-minded
for not developing a taste for it (and they *may* be right in some
cases, but I think they may be missing the "subzero" explanation).

## Examples of subzero activities for me and others

### Commuting

Commuting to work is a subzero activity for me -- I wouldn't do it for
its own sake, even though in many cases I enjoyed the
experience. However, back when I worked in a physical office (and the
nuances of virtual communication were less well-developed), the
benefits of being able to have that job and interact with colleagues,
while continuing to live in an area I liked to live in, overwhelmed
the cost of commuting.

The concept of commuting as a subzero activity probably makes sense to
a lot of people; commuting has its lovers and haters too, but few
think it is socially *expected* to love commuting.

### Recreational travel

Recreational travel is a subzero activity for me -- I haven't engaaged
in it for several years, and probably wouldn't do it for its own sake,
even if I were fabulously wealthy and didn't have to work for several
years. This is the case even though I expect maybe 60-80% of
recreational travel to actually make me feel good; I just expect that
even over several years, the set of other activities I want to do,
both for accomplishing stuff and for entertainment, beat out
recreational travel.

But, I could imagine reasons for doing it such as spending time with
specific people I wanted to spend time with, who wanted to spend that
time while recreationally traveling.

This one is potentially controversial because a lot of people *love*
recreational travel, and there are also senses in which expressing a
love for recreational travel establishes one's high status (being able
to afford money and time for it) and one's good personality
(curiosity, openness, diversity of experience). And I could very well
be wrong about this.

### Various kinds of games (computer games, board games)

Probably controversially for a forum visited by nerds and geeks, for
the most part, computer games and board games are subzero activities
for me. For the most part, I don't dislike them. For instance, when
Chrome cannot connect to the Internet, it loads a simple hoop-jumping
game. When I used to commute to work, connectivity would drop
intermittently and I remember enjoying playing the game while waiting
for connectivity to return. In that particular context (no
connectivity, with no other offline activity that I was eager to do
for the minute or so of waiting) the game was worth playing.

Since I've stopped commuting, though, I've played the game very few
times.

### Watching TV and movies

Watching TV and movies is *not* subzero for me, but could be for many
others. They may find the experience of TV or movies fun and
interesting, but it just may not compete with other ways of spending
their time.

## Misintepretation of subzero activities

### The hate misinterpretation

People who really enjoy recreational travel, boad games, TV, or
movies, may assume that if you treat them as subzero, you hate them.