# Unreasonably effective ways to make a good long-term impression

Over the past few years, in social and professional circles, I've
noticed a few things that seem unreasonably effective in terms of
making a good impression. A lot of the information is based on what
I've seen work in the context of a day job (both at companies I've
worked for and at companies I've interfaced with). To a lesser extent,
I've also drawn of what I've seen in various social circles such as
the effective altruist and rationalist communities.

I think things of a similar nature to these are also important in
interpersonal relationships, though I think they may not be quite as
"unreasonably effectve" in those contexts.

The four things I've identified are:

* Responsiveness
* Clueyness (being clued-in)
* Reliability and positive affect
* Magic

Along with these, I also talk of various other similar or related
things that I think *aren't* anywhere near as effective.

## Responsiveness

### The mechanism by which responsiveness is unreasonably effective

In my experience, being responsive to the needs and wants of others is
unreasonably effective in getting them to have a high opinion of
you.

In some ways, this can be seen as a downside; people who're working on
deeper, more foundational work that isn't directly responsive to what
people are asking for right now can be at a disadvantage in the
perception game. On the other hand, being responsive can be seen as a
relatively low-risk way of making sure you're at least somewhat
useful.

Roughly speaking, the reason it's *unreasonably effective* is that
when people ask questions or ask for help, they care much more about
whether and how well you address their needs (as opposed to caring in
general about other aspects of your work). This is evidenced by the
*fact that they asked*, i.e., by the fact that they put in the
cognitive and social effort of actually asking.

Concretely, you can try an experiment of this sort (if you have enough
slack to do these kinds of experiments!). For one period (maybe a
week, maybe a month), try to focus on your longer-term tasks,
deprioritizing responding to others quickly. For another period of
similar length, focus on responding quickly, and let your long-term
work suffer to the extent needed for you to be responsive. Get
feedback on what others think of how productive and useful you were in
those two periods.

### Speed as a key element of responsiveness

A simple metric for responsiveness is *how quickly* you respond. This
can be refined a bit to distinguish between time taken to acknowledge
versus time taken to fully address or resolve whatever you're
responding to.

Speed is important for a few reasons:

* Sometimes, the individual thing is time-sensitive.
* The faster the response, the more iterations of response can happen,
  which means that more can happen overall. For instance, you suggest
  "can you try X?" and they come back with "I tried X, and Y happened"
  and then you respond "ok it looks like the issue is Z"; the times
  taken for each response iteration add up.
* There's a psychological benefit of immediacy of response in terms of
  reducing the need for the person asking the question to switch back
  context; when somebody asks a question or asks for something, the
  material is fresh in their mind, and it fades out quickly going
  farther.

There's some nuance on whether it's worthwhile to send a message to
acknowledge a question or request, versus just wait and send a more
substantive response or resolution. My general sense is that if the
person asking does not already have experience with you being
responsive, it is good to acknowledge and thereby reassure them that
you're on it.

However, in cases where the person already has experience with you
being responsive, and/or has visibility in other ways to have a
reasonable sense that you're on it, it may not be necessary to
acknowledge. In some cases, it may even be a bad idea to send an
information-free acknowledgement, insofar as it adds to the other
person's notification load and ultimately doesn't give them new
information. Overall, this is a trade-off that would need to be
navigated based on the type of environment and relationship, but if in
doubt, my suggestion would be to err on the side of a speedy
acknowledgement.

### Responsiveness to directed versus undirected messages

When a message is addressed directly and specifically to you,
responding to it becomes a requirement of sorts. In this kind of
situation, not responding at all can earn you negative
credibility. Responding adequately keeps you at baseline (without
improving things) whereas responding better than baseline can give you
a leg up in the perception game.

On the other hand, in the case of *undirected* messages, for instance,
questions posed on a mailing list or a Slack channel, the baseline of
not responding is close to zero effect, so *any helpful response at
all* (and in some cases, even a response that turns out to not have
been useful but shows that you made a good-faith effort to help) can
help your perception. Opportunities of this kind abound in many
technology organizations that use tools like Slack; just look around
at the Slack channels, locate open-ended questions that don't yet have
engagement, that seem particularly important or time-sensitive, and
that are a good fit for your skills, and jump on them! In the context
of Slack channels that have a large number of members, your
responsiveness improves your perception not just with the person
asking the question, but with others who are following happenings in
the channel.

There are two obvious caveats when tackling undirected messages:

* If you are clearly behind on important deliverables (including
  addressing directed messages), then replying to undirected messages
  can raise flags about your prioritization skills, and therefore hurt
  you in the perception game. So make sure that you're on top of your
  deliverables and the directed messages before jumping on undirected
  messages.

* When submitting contributions to undirected messages, you want to
  make sure your contribution satisfies a minimum standard of quality,
  because by responding, you may be displacing others who could have
  spent effort responding. If you respond with something that seems
  correct but turns out to be wrong, you've done worse than if you had
  just stayed silent and let somebody else respond. This is more of an
  issue with undirected messages than with directed messages, because
  with directed messages, the person directing the message at you has
  already *chosen you* to make the effort.

  Relatedly, once you start submitting partial responses to an
  undirected message, others who may have otherwise organically
  started addressing it may be dissuaded, so if you later stop
  focusing on it, you may have "orphaned" the original message.

  So, before submitting your first response, make sure you know what
  you're saying well enough that it's not misleading and won't
  displace others' efforts, and that you're not leading others on in
  terms of the additional effort you're willing to put in.

### Frequent monitoring

Given the importance of speed, it's important to frequently monitor
for incoming messages and to make sure you're available for emergency
forms of contact. The details of this can vary from situation to
situation.

One thing to remember is that frequent monitoring doesn't equate to
immediate response; you can look at a message and decide "this isn't
urgent enough to merit a response now; I'll respond later." As long as
you have a good system of reminders (something supported through
software in many ways, ranging from Slack reminders to calendar
reminders to a plethora of reminder apps) this doesn't put you at a
disadvantage relative to reading the message later.

For myself, I use [trigger-based rapid
checklists](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/9B2zFwN5iepkC9LqJ/trigger-based-rapid-checklists)
whereby I check various sources of messages at various triggers,
including in the morning after waking up, at night before going to
sleep,, and at various points in between, including before going out
and after returning, or before and after meals. I keep it simple: I
aim to check all sources of messages at each trigger, including
checking work-related sources of messages even on days that I'm not
working. In most cases, the volume of messages is small enough and
almost none of them need immediate action; in some cases, quick action
can be undertaken to address them. In a few rare cases, it doesn't
make sense to respond (for instance, something requiring a complex
response that I read right before going to sleep) so I set a reminder
for myself to get to it later, and if needed, I send a quick
acknowledgement.

### The concern about setting unrealistic expectations through very good responsiveness

I've heard people voice a potential downside of very good
responsiveness: it sets unrealistic expectations that your responses
will continue to be comparatively good, and this may not be
sustainable. The two forms in which I've most often heard this concern
are:

* Speed of response: For instance, if for a few weeks you respond to
  incoming messages within minutes, they may expect that you will
  continue to do so, and so they may feel more disappointed when your
  response latency goes up from minutes to hours. Whereas if you took
  a day to respond in the past, they won't be disappointed if you
  respond within hours.

* Working hours: For instance, if somebody is reaching out frequently
  outside working hours, and you respond quickly even outside working
  hours, that might create the expectation that you will continue to
  respond outside working hours.

While I think this concern is valid to some extent, I think there are
relatively easy ways to address it, and in my personal experience,
both as a responder and somebody making requests, these have worked
reasonably well.

#### Apologize or explain yourself only when you fail to meet the baseline expectations, not when you fall short of your elevated responsiveness

You should have a reasonably clear picture of the distinction between
the *baseline* expectations around how quickly others should expect to
respond, versus your own goal of elevated responsiveness that you try
to adhere to where feasible. And you should *not* explain yourself as
long as you are above the baseline expectations, even if you fall
short of your elevated goals. Apologies or explanations influence the
other person's mental model of what they are owed, more than what you
actually do. Here are some examples:

* Speed of response: For instance, if you often reply within minutes,
  but one day took an hour to respond, and the baseline expectation is
  that you should respond within a day, then *don't apologize or
  explain yourself* for taking an hour to respond.

* Working hours: For instance, if somebody reached out to you twice
  outside working hours, and you responded immediately once, but the
  other time you only responded at the start of working hours, you
  don't need to apologize or explain yourself for the second time. If
  you think they *aren't* aware of the working hours, you should try
  to make sure they're aware, perhaps by mentioning it somewhere
  unobtrusively, or (for instance if you're responding through a
  ticketing system) through an auto-responder in the ticketing system.

#### Flag cases where you think the other person might be taking undue risk by relying on your responsiveness

Sometimes, people may build your responsiveness as an assumption into
their own plans, to their detriment and yours. In particular:

* Speed of response: Somebody may make a plan to do something with
  some level of risk, with the expectation that you'll be available to
  respond quickly if something goes wrong.

  Flag this if it happens, and perhaps even preempt this, by
  encouraging people to reach out proactively when doing something
  potentially risky. The proactive reachout could help reduce risk in
  various ways: you may be able to see a preview and vet it before the
  change goes "live", or you may be able to coordinate a time that you
  can be sure to be available to monitor for issues.

  If something goes unexpectedly wrong, and you are available to
  respond quickly, it's best to respond, rather than hold your
  response hostage. But if you see predictable patterns where people
  were relying on your responsiveness rather than planning and
  coordinating with you, flag this.

* Working hours: If somebody is doing particularly risky things
  outside of your working hours, with the expectation that you'll be
  responsive, flag this. Remind them of your working hours and ask
  that risky things that may require your input be done within your
  working hours.

#### The 75% heuristic

While the previous two techniques seem to work reasonably well,
another heuristic that you can use to reduce the risk of implicitly
creating unrealistic expectations with somebody you have a lot of
repeat interactions is what I call the "75% heuristic", namely, aim
for about 75% of your interactions to meet your elevated standards of
responsiveness, and for the remaining 25%, aim to stay above baseline
levels of responsiveness, but below the elevated levels. People are
relatively less likely to start relying on or expecting a level of
responsiveness that they only receive 75% of the time.

If delivering elevated responsiveness 75% of the time feels too
burdensome, then there are likely other structural issues, such as too
much workload, not enough skill or competence, or too much other stuff
going on in life. My general sense is that absent these factors, a 75%
target gives enough room for a reasonable frequency of things coming
up and juggling other priorities.
