Mirror of
https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/9Jgtkw8CD6kndyCcD/ai-41-bring-in-the-other-gemini?commentId=DXbhvWyBqNoXFsjje

> He points to recent events at Sports Illustrated. But to me the SI
> incident was the opposite. It indicated that we cannot do this
> yet. The AI content is not good. Not yet. Nor are we especially
> close. Instead people are using AI to produce garbage that fools us
> into clicking on it. How close are we to the AI content actually
> being as good as the human content? Good question.

I happen to work at the company (The Arena Group) that operates Sports
Illustrated. I wasn't involved with any of this stuff directly (and
may not even have been at the company over some of the relevant time
period), and obviously I speak only for myself (and will restrict
myself to the public information available on this which is anyway
most of what I know). With that said: most of the media coverage of
this issue was pretty bad (as it is for most issues, but then,
Gell-Mann Amnesia ...). In particular, the Futurism article has a lot
of issues. The best article I found on this was
https://www.theverge.com/2023/11/27/23978389/sports-illustrated-ai-fake-authors-advon-commerce-gannett-usa-today
that properly explains who the vendor in question was and the vendor's
track record on another site. Overall, the Verge article helps check
out the Arena Group's official statement that the articles were from
AdVon, despite the seeming reluctance of Futurism (and other
publications) to accept that.

The maybe-AI-maybe-not-AI content was written way way before the whole
ChatGPT thing raised the profile of AI. Futurism links to
https://web.archive.org/web/20221004090814/https://www.si.com/review/full-size-volleyball/
which is a snapshot of the article from October 2022, before the wide
release of ChatGPT, and well before The Arena Group made public
announcements about experimenting with AI. But in fact the article is
even way older than October 2022; the oldest snapshot
https://web.archive.org/web/20210916150227/https://www.si.com/review/full-size-volleyball/
of the article is from September 16, 2021, and the article publication
date is September 2, 2021. Way before ChatGPT or any of the AI hype.
And even that earliest version shows the same photo and a similar bio.

So to my mind this comes down to the use of a vendor (AdVon) with
shady practices, and either the lack of due diligence in vendor
selection or not caring about the details of their practices as long
as they're driving revenue to the site and not hurting the site's
brand. The reason to use a vendor like this is simply that they drive
affiliate marketing revenue (people find the recommended content
interesting, they click on it, maybe buy it, everybody gets a cut of
the revenue, everybody is happy). This simply isn't even part of the
editorial content and basically has nothing to do with replacing real
writers of sports content with AI writers -- it's simply an effort to
leverage the brand of the site by running a side business from one
corner of it. Also, to the extent it is or isn't ethical, the issue
probably has more to do with whether the reviews were genuine rather
than whether the authors were human or AI -- even if the authors were
human, if the reviews were fraudulent, it would be a problem in equal
measure. So overall I think the vendor selection was problematic, but
this has little to do with AI.

Separately, many sports sites, including Sports Illustrated, have used
automatically (/ "AI")-generated content for routine content such as
game summaries, e.g., using the services of Data Skrive:
https://www.si.com/author/data-skrive -- this is probably a little
closer to the idea of replacing human writers, but the kind of content
being created is pretty much the kind of content that humans wouldn't
want to spend time creating.

The Arena Group has done some AI experimentation with the goal of
trying to use AI-like tools to write normal content (not things like
game summaries), as Futurism critiqued at
https://futurism.com/neoscope/magazine-mens-journal-errors-ai-health-article
but this AdVon thing is completely separate in time, in space, and in
purpose.
