Question: https://travel.stackexchange.com/questions/183668/should-i-be-stapling-my-uscis-form-i-94-not-cbp-form-i-94-at-every-extension

Full markdown of question below (comments and answers *not* mirrored here):

I have had multiple changes of status / extensions of my H-1B since my last entry into the United States 6 years ago, all through filing Form I-129. This included two regular H-1B extensions and a few other filings related to changes to my hours and jobs. In total, *since my last entry into the United States*, I've had 6 I-129s filed, and correspondingly gotten 6 I-797A approval notices, each of which had a "USCIS Form I-94" on the bottom left that plays a similar role to the CBP Form I-94 in terms of conferring the legal right to continue residing in the United States. (Others may similarly receive "USCIS Form I-94" with the I-797A approval notice for a Form I-539 application for change of status or extension of stay).

I've heard that the "official" guidance regarding the USCIS Form I-94 used to be to cut it out of the I-797A and staple it to the passport, and then, when traveling out of the United States, to turn it in just like one would for a CBP Form I-94. But CBP moved to an electronic arrival/departure record card system several years ago, so even the CBP Form I-94 is no longer physically stapled to the passport, and doesn't need to be turned in when departing the United States. So I'm wondering what the current guidance is regarding what to do with the USCIS Form I-94s, including the ones that are already no longer applicable because they've been superseded by newer ones?

All else equal, I would rather keep them with the original I-797A notices rather than cut them out and staple them to the passport, to (a) conserve space in the passport for other stuff like visas, (b) reduce the risk of them falling out through use of the passport, (c) reduce the amount of staples on the passport, (d) make sure I have access to them even if I have to turn in the passport (e.g., for passport renewal, or to get a new visa).

Does anybody (in CBP, consular offices, or any other aspects of US government bureaucracy) care about the USCIS Form I-94 being attached to the passport?
