I've just switched jobs! I'm now working full-time at Equator Therapeutics, a Y Combinator-funded drug discovery startup working on a drug to induce mitochondrial thermogenesis. The CEO and co-founder of Equator is my former housemate and collaborator Jonah Sinick, and I'm excited to be working closely with him again after ~8 years.

The job I've just left has been one that I've been in (in one variant or another) for over 8 years. I joined the Y Combinator-funded tech startup company LiftIgniter back in August 2014 after being offered the job by Indraneel Mukherjee, who had been my senior in college. I was part of LiftIgniter's growth and struggles for several years till it got acquired in early 2020 by Maven (now The Arena Group), a media company with a strong tech component. I continued to work at The Arena Group on the LiftIgniter product and other technical products until my departure in September 2022. It has been a really great journey and I particularly appreciate the people who worked closely with me (and put up with me!) through various parts of this journey.

The job change has definitely been more of a "pull" than a "push" -- I'm really excited to work with Jonah, and I'm really excited and curious to see how the skills I've acquired around data science and data engineering can be applied to really important problems such as the one Equator is working on.

Things are pretty hectic right now during the transition phase and as I ramp up on Equator for the next few months (so continue to expect not a lot in terms of posts here on Facebook for the next few months)! I hope that I'll be able to share more thoughts in the next few months around my life in the tech sector as well as my reasons for switching to biotech.
