# Laptop and phone theft and return to normalcy

In this document:

* [Theft](#theft)
* [Recovery](#recovery)

## Theft

On Friday, May 10, 2019, I got up quite late (around 9 AM, compared to
my usual 6 AM). I took the Millbrae BART (train 445) at North Berkeley
around 10:37 AM, heading to work at San Bruno. At 10:40 AM, when the
train arrived in downtown Berkeley, an individual in my train car
snatched my laptop from me and ran. I ran after him, leaving my bag
behind. My bag had my phone, and it seems like somebody else took the
phone from the bag. I was able to recover the bag later, without the
phone.

### Journey from North Berkeley BART to downtown Berkeley BART

I got on to the last car of a 5-car San Francisco/Millbrae train
(train 445). I sat on a rear-facing window seat somewhere roughly
midway between the two train doors on the left side of the train. When
I got on, there was a group of kids also seated in the middle of the
train car (but closer to the front train door of the train car). They
looked like they were of school age. It was a mix of males and
females. Most but not all of them were black.

They appeared to notice me and seemed to be saying something about me,
but i assumed those were just kid jokes. One of them also touched my
hair while the train was in the journey from North Berkeley to
downtown Berkeley. Again, I dismissed this as a childish prank.

During this journey, I was working on my 13'' Space Gray Macbook Pro
laptop, using my OnePlus 3 phoen for hotspot. My very last action on
the laptop was to close a GitHub issue in a work repository.

### Laptop snatching at downtown Berkeley

The train arrived at downtown Berkeley around 10:40 AM. After the
train doors opened, one of the individuals from the group snatched my
laptop and exited through the rear door of the car. Without thinking,
I chased him, leaving my bag and phone behind. I almost caught up with
him but could not grab him. He jumped the turnstiles at the northern
entrance to the downtown Berkeley BART and then continued exiting.

Most of the other people in the group also exited at the same station,
but they all used their Clipper cards or other payment methods to
exit, rather than jumping the turnstile. Their level of involvement
with the theft isn't clear.

### Reporting and waiting

I immediately reported the situation to the station agent at the
booth. She called the BART Police and also asked the other stations
down the line if they had received a turned-in bag (the one that I had
left on the train).

After a while, a BART Police officer came by. The first priority of
the police officer and the station agent was to help me recover my
bag. The police agents did try looking for the bag in the train at
Oakland but did not find it. However, some passengers did report
seeing the bag. Finally, it was turned in at Civic Center and then
given to the Powell Street police booth. It looked like the bag had
been rummaged through and the phone and some coins removed from it. I
was asked to pick the bag up from Powell Street.

The officer took my statement. I also asked the officer about the
likelihood of recovery. He said that recovery was quite unlikely
because the laptop would turn over quite quickly. He also said that
even though the train cameras would likely have caught the
perpetrator, he was likely not in the system yet so BART Police would
not be able to identify him in real life.

The officer gave me his card with his email address and asked me to
send him any further information over email.

### Pickup of laptop from Powell Street

I took the train to Powell Street, got off there (around 11:55), then
went to the police booth. The booth was locked so I used the phone
right outside to dial in. I was asked to wait for the Community
Service Officers to come by with the bag. They came by and gave me the
bag. I confirmed that the phone was no longer in it. This was
completed around 12:15.

## Recovery

Recovery was significantly complicated by a few factors:

* Simultaneous loss of both laptop and phone
* The phone number on some of my accounts was an older phone number,
  so I had to recover two phone numbers rather than one

It was, however, helped by a few factors:

* Work-related stuff was recovered with the help of other people at
  work
* I didn't lose any of my payment cards, cash, or identifications
  (such as the California state ID)
* Since my laptop had encryption, my data wasn't compromised
* Since most of my active work is synced with GitHub, or otherwise in
  the cloud, I lost very little data

### Purchase of new laptop

I exited the BART at Powell Street and went to the Apple Store at
Union Square (about a 7-minute walk from the station). There, I
purchased a new $1199 ($1305 after taxes) Macbook Air 13'' space gray
laptop. The purchase was executed at 12:33 PM. I then went back to the
Powell Street BART and took the train to work (at San Bruno). I got in
at work a little bit after 1 PM.

### Installation of new laptop and initial account recovery

After getting in at San Bruno, I installed my new laptop, then set up
various authentication keys. All the setup and account recovery steps
that were immediately needed were completed by around 5:30 PM. In
addition to work-related recovery, I also initiated recovery
procedures for personal accounts (Facebook and Gmail).

Then, I started documenting the recovery steps for future reference by
others. I would continue this documentation work over the next few
days; people in my company can see the work at
[ER-727](https://liftigniter.atlassian.net/browse/ER-727).

I left work a little after 6 PM along with other work
colleagues.

### Purchase of new phone with my main phone number

On Saturday May 11, after lunch, I went to the T-Mobile store at
downtown Berkeley and purchased a new phone. I also associated my
existing phone number to the new phone. The phone purchase happened
around 5:10 PM. Over the next day, I set up various apps and
authentications on the phone.

### Recovery of personal Gmail

I was able to recover my personal Gmail on Sunday May 12 evening after
Gmail support removed the two-factor authentication on the account.

After recovering personal Gmail, I was also able to recover GitHub (my
GitHub recovery codes were recorded in my personal Gmail). Next, I was
able to email the serial number of my stolen laptop to the BART Police
officer (the receipt for the laptop purchase was in my Gmail inbox).

### Purchase of SIM card for an older number

I had an older phone number but the device for that number had died
out; unfortunately some of my accounts were still tied to the old
number. Their device-based 2FA was tied to the stolen phone, but the
number was that of the older phone.

To recover this, I had to purchase a new SIM card for the old number,
then swap that in whenever I needed authentication of the old number.

After getting the SIM card for the older number, I was able to recover
Facebook and Venmo and initiate recovery for Coinbase.
