This simple financial advice is designed around the following goals:

* Minimizing time overhead of financial planning: The heuristics here
  are very simple, easily justified, and easy to follow.

* Maximizing financial security, with increasing time horizons: Rather
  than using complicated or risky strategies for wealth optimization,
  they optimize for financial security, starting with the short run
  and then moving to the long run.

## Have the money in your checking account fluctuate between 2,500 and 5,000

 If you have set up your paycheck to do a direct deposit into your
 checking account, the amount in your checking account will be at its
 minimum right before pay day. If you target having a little over
 $2,500 at this point, you will be good.

If you write checks or make credit card payments for large amounts
(e.g., more tha $500) make sure to increase the balance in your
checking account to be able to cover that extra expense for when the
check gets deposited or the credit card bill is due.

Periodically, move excess money (beyond what's needed to be over
$2,500 till before the next payday) to a savings or money market
account. Moving money every 2 months (or even less frequently) is
fine.

With a $2,500 buffer, you will effectively eliminate the risk of
overdraft or falling behind on credit card payments, and you won't
need to do any manual work moving money between accounts for several
months.

References:

- [How Much Money Should You Really Keep in a Checking Account?](https://www.fool.com/the-ascent/banks/articles/how-much-money-should-you-really-keep-in-checking-account/)
- [Why $2,467 could be the magic number for emergency savings](https://www.marketwatch.com/story/why-2467-could-be-the-magic-number-for-emergency-savings-2019-10-15)

## Use a debit card for regular expenses, and use credit cards only when there are specific reasons

If you use the debit card for regular expenses, your finances will
simplify quite a bit as you only have a single bank balance to worry
about (rather than a bank balance + a credit card balance).

Don't use a credit card as a way of borrowing money against the
future. Rather, only use a credit card when there are other benefits,
such as rewards points or flexibility to cancel (if dealing with an
untrustworthy seller).

Even when you do use a credit card, keeping corresponding extra
balance in your checking account means that your use of credit card is
motivated by specific benefits rather than as a way to borrow money
you don't have. For instance, if you buy something for $2,000 with a
credit card, put an extra $2,000 in your checking account.

## Build up a 30,000 USD (6-12 month saving buffer) in a reasonably liquid account before you diversify into other investments

Having $30,000 in a savings account or money market account will cover
6-12 months of expenses, and basically make you have to stop worrying
about suddenly getting into a bad financial situation.

In particular, get to this point before you put money into:

* Cryptocurrency
* Index funds
* 401(k)s and other retirement accounts
* Certificates of deposit

Once you cross the 30,000 USD threshold, start considering these
alternatives.

If you plan to do something more risky (like start your own company)
you may want to save much more than $30,000 in liquid form.

## Once you have crossed a basic liquid threshold, start thinking on longer time horizons

Once you have crossed $30,000 in savings (or whatever higher amount
you deem necessary), start thinking on the 2-to-5-year time horizon
with incremental savings.

There are two approaches you can take:

* Put money into low-risk, moderate-reward investments such as
  certificates of deposit (CDs). These have guaranteed interest rates
  and short maturity periods, ideal for a horizon of a few years. You
  can start looking into CDs immediately on crossing the $30,000
  threshold, though minimum deposit requirements for CDs may mean that
  you need to wait to accumulate some more money before you can use a
  CD. This is the preferred approach if you are targeting a strong
  amount of liquid savings in the next 2-3 years.

* Wait a little bit (accumulate even more in liquid savings) and then
  invest in something more high-risk, high-reward, like an index
  fund. Index funds averrage higher interest rates. They are high-risk
  over short time periods, but over longer time periods the risk in
  them is low.

In addition, you may want to opt in to employer-sponsored 401(k)
plans, up to the point that the employer offers 1:1 matching, as long
as you make sure you still maintain a positive saving rate after
deducting the income withheld for the 401(k).
