I got into an accident at a crosswalk at the intersection between
Acton Street and Delaware Street on Tuesday, September 10, 2019,
around 7 PM Pacific Time.

## Accident details

I was walking back from the North Berkeley BART to my residence. I was
working in the north-south direction (crossing Delaware Street) on the
east side. The intersection is a four-way intersection controlled by
STOP signs. The driver was driving on Delaware Street from east to
west.

Before I started crossing, I noticed that the driver was approaching
the intersection but was slowing down and heading to a
stop. Therefore, I started crossing.

The driver did stop at the intersection (though I don't think it was a
complete stop, but the speed did go down to probably 2 mph or so);
however, the driver restarted just as I crossed the path of the
car. This means that the driver had just restarted and was driving
very slowly (my guess is around 5 mph or so).

I was hit and fell forward on my right side. The driver braked
immediately, so I was not run over.

The car was a Hyundai Elantra. The driver provided some contact
details.

The driver explained that although she'd seen me, she thought I wasn't
crossing, and she failed to notice me because the sun was in her eyes;
as mentioned above, she was driving westward and it was near the end
of the day, so this is consistent.

## Injuries and recovery

### External injuries

Since I fell on my right side, my main injuries were on my right. The
main visible injury was to my right arm. It started off as a bruise
and started bleeding; I cleaned the wound and covered it in a few
bandages. I also had a bruise a little below the waist on my right
side. This did not start bleeding; nonetheless, I covered it with a
bandage to avoid it deteriorating further.

### Internal injuries

I did not have severe internal injuries. However, I did have stiffness
in a few parts of my body, including the bottom right of my ribs, the
back of my neck, my knees, and lower legs.

### Recovery

Initially I felt weak and shaken without concrete injuries; after
around 12 hours, I felt more explicit pains. After about 1 day, most
of my internal pains were reduced, but I still needed to be careful
about craning my neck or rapidly moving some parts of my body.

To speed up my recovery, I took some precautions:

* I slept from around 8:45 to 7:30 the day of the accident. Although
  sleep wasn't too peaceful because of the pain, the greater duration
  approximately made up for it.

* I made more use of pillows and did some experimentation to find
  comfortable sleeping positions.

* I stayed home the next day (September 11) and worked fewer hours
  than usual. I also took a nap for one hour from 6 PM to 7 PM, kept
  my surroundings darker than usual (to respect my already-present
  light-sensitivity) and again slept a little longer than usual.

* By Thursday, September 12, I was feeling well again. However, I
  still skipped morning exercise on Thursday and Friday. I had anyway
  marked Friday as a holiday, so I saved myself from commuting on that
  day as well.

