## Lenovo Z40 Windows 10 laptop

Purchase date: August/September 2014

Disposal plan: I don't expect the laptop to be much use to people now,
so I am thinking of dropping it off at an e-waste facility. **I will
also check for power cord and other accessories and dispose all of
them that I don't have any clear and obvious alternative use of.**

More information:

I used the laptop only occasionally in 2014 and 2015, and my use
dropped a lot since then (I only used it yearly to do taxes, but
didn't even use it for that purpose in 2019). As of December 31, 2019,
I believe I haven't used it at all for over a year.

Every time I turn it on it's quite slow, though that's probably
because of all the upgrades that need to happen since I haven't turned
it on for several months at the time of turn-on.

## Kindle Deluxe (Kindle DX)

Purchase date: December 2013

Disposal plan: Returning to Amazon using their Kindle Trade-In
Program. I will get $5 back on net (along with free shipping).

More information:

I bought a Kindle DX in December 2013. Back then, I didn't have a
smartphone, and used to read a lot more books. Having a Kindle DX with
free 3G was useful.

I've barely used this since August 2014, when I got my Windows
Phone. It is still functional but I believe it's been untied from my
Amazon account so it's mostly just useful for reading PDFs.

## Western Digital external disk drive (1 TB)

Purchase date: Probably over ten years ago. I don't remember the exact
purchase date.

Disposal plan: I might keep this if it's still functional, or I might
transfer the information to a more compact form of storage and then
drop it off at an e-waste faciility.

## Sony Lens G Camera

Purchase date: Before July 2012. A friend gave it to me when she was
leaving (we were doing some video shooting together, and she didn't
need the camera and gave it to me so I could shoot more videos).

Disposal plan: ?? -- I think the camera is perfectly functional and
may be good for shooting videos. So if there isn't anybody else who
wants it, I will prefer to keep it than send it to e-waste.

More information:

I've used the camera just a few times since 2014, including once to
shoot a video of my home for my parents to see. For most purposes, my
smartphone camera is "good enough" and also faster to use (as I can
upload to the Internet more quickly from my smartphone).

## USB flash drives

Purchase date: ~2011

Disposal plan: Drop off at e-waste facility after verifying that the
flash drives are no longer usable

## Windows Nokia Lumia 921 phone

Purchase date: August 2014

Disposal plan: Drop off at e-waste facility after doing a factory
reset of the phone and erasing all personal data

## Video CDs and DVDs

Purchase date: 2011 and earlier

Disposal plan: I will review the whole list, then get rid of the ones
that I either: (a) have digital backups of, (b) can access on
streaming services, or (c) don't really need. My goal is to get rid of
all of them so I can have a lighter existence.
