This guide explore strategies for getting web traffic data for third-party websites, i.e., websites that are not owned and operated by you. The guide is helpful for providing benchmarks for your own website, in particular benchmarks for overall traffic levels, [[Understand Your Website Traffic Variation with Time|traffic variation with time]], and your [[Understand Your Website Audience Profile|audience profile]]. It can also be used to address the website-based method of [[Gauge the Popularity of a Topic Online|gauging the popularity of a topic online]].

== Steps ==
=== Quantcast Measure ===
# Get data about the website, if available, at https://www.quantcast.com/<domainname>.
#* For instance, for the website Trello, with domain name trello.com, you can get data at https://www.quantcast.com/trello.com.<ref name=quantcast-trello>[https://www.quantcast.com/trello.com Quantcast data for Trello]. Retrieved April 26, 2017</ref> Similarly, for the website Glassdoor, with domain name glassdoor.com, you can get data at https://www.quantcast.com/glassdoor.com.<ref name=quantcast-glassdoor>[https://www.quantcast.com/glassdoor.com Quantcast data for Glassdoor]. Retrieved April 26, 2017</ref>
#* In case of subdomains, you should enter the subdomain name instead of the domain. For instance, for the Math Stack Exchange (math.stackexchange.com), you would look for data at https://www.quantcast.com/math.stackexchange.com.<ref name=quantcast-math-stackexchange>[https://www.quantcast.com/math.stackexchange.com Quantcast data for Math Stack Exchange]. Retrieved April 26, 2017</ref>
#* There are two kinds of websites: those that use Quantcast Measure (that Quantcast calls "quantified"), and those that do not. For websites that use Quantcast Measure, you will see the website name and a check mark in front of the name on top, and website traffic data below. For websites that do not use Quantcast Measure you will see a message on top of the form: "<website> is not currently using Quantcast Measure. As a result, we're unable to show you a full breakout of their audience data. If you own or work at <website> sign up for Quantcast Measure and place the measurement tag on your site to get all the audience insights detailed below."
#* For websites that ''do'' use Quantcast Measure, some sections of the traffic report may not be visible. There are two typical reasons for this: (a) the website owner has opted out of making that section of the traffic report visible, and (b) there is too little data to populate that section of the report (for websites with reasonable traffic, this generally happens ''only'' if the website turned on Quantcast Measure less than 30 days ago). For each hidden part of the traffic report, a message explaining that the section is hidden, along with the reason, is displayed at the part of the page where the section would have shown up. The message shown for (a) is "This publisher has not made the data in this report publicly available. If this is your profile, make sure you are logged in to view this report." The message shown for (b) is "Not enough data has been collected to populate this report. If you're the admin of this profile and believe this is an error, see our implementation guide for troubleshooting tips."
#* In case you get the error message (a), check archive.is for older versions of the page. You might be able to locate an older version when the publisher had not restricted access to the data. However, versions stored in archive.is will not have full functionality. Examples of websites that used to show public data but do not now are: Twitch.tv,<ref>[https://archive.fo/https://www.quantcast.com/twitch.tv Archived Quantcast report for Twitch.tv], archived March 18, 2015, archived version retrieved April 26, 2017</ref> and CNN.<ref>[https://archive.fo/https://www.quantcast.com/cnn.com Archived Quantcast report for CNN.com], archived July 17, 2016, archived version retrieved April 26, 2017</ref> Note that you ''cannot'' use the Internet Archive's Wayback Machine (web.archive.org) because this does not archive Quantcast reports. So you must use archive.is for looking up data.
# Use the following rules of thumb when judging whether the website you are looking for (or similar websites) would have Quantcast data available.
#* Most of the websites that share data with Quantcast ''and'' allow Quantcast to show the data publicly tend to be media websites whose business model is advertising-based. Moreover, most of them are either based in on have a significant presence in the United States, since Quantcast data is most reliable and most useful to show to advertisers for United States audiences. In particular, if the topic of your website is not one that media companies and publishing groups have interest in, it can be hard to find examples to benchmark against.
#* Another thing to keep in mind regarding the availability of Quantcast data is that the decision to share data with Quantcast is made at the level of the media company or publishing group, rather than the individual website. Therefore, either all (or most) of the websites under a given publishing group would have QM data publicly visible, or none would. Some publishing groups and companies that have publicly available QM data for most of their sites include: the Stack Exchange Network (Stack Overflow and all Stack Exchange sites), Tegna, Woven Digital (Uproxx, Brobible, and some other male-focused humor and celebrity news sites), Vox Media Network (Vox, Eater, Racked, and a few other sites), Onion Media Network (The Onion and sister sites), COED Media Group Network (COED, College Candy, and Busted Coverage), Bonnier Corporation Network (many outdoors sporting sites as well as popsci.com), and Idle Media (HipHopEarly and sister sites). Some publishers that do ''not'' use Quantcast Measure or do not share the data publicly include Hearst, Conde Nast, and Time Inc.
#* Image-sharing sites (such as Imgur, Giphy, Gfycat) all have publicly available Quantcast Measure data.
#* However, it doesn't hurt to check even if you don't expect the website to share data using Quantcast Measure. For instance, Trello<ref name=quantcast-trello/> and Glassdoor<ref name=quantcast-glassdoor/> both use Quantcast Measure though they don't fit the "publisher" stereotype perfectly.
# Examine the various parts of the traffic report.
#* The first section of the traffic report is the Traffic Card, showing total uniques, views, and visits over a time range of your choosing, and at a granularity of day, week, or 30 day. Uniques are available only over time periods of a day, week, or 30 days. Data is available only from the point in time the website started using Quantcast Measure. Data is broken down as United States and non-United States. The timezone is chosen based on the place where the majority of traffic to the website comes from; for most websites that use Quantcast Measure, this is the United States, and the timezone is Mexico City's timezone (as that it close to the average of the various US timezones). The traffic numbers are based on direct, first-party measurement (using Quantcast's JavaScript installed on the website, that works in a similar way as Google Analytics). It therefore measures all traffic by users on browsers that can run JavaScript and are not using an ad blocker setting that blocks analytics tools. The numbers shown here can be compared with the numbers shown in Google Analytics, though they may not exactly match.
#* The second section of the traffic report is the Demographics Card. This includes gender, age buckets, education level, and race. Unlike the traffic card, the demographics card is not based purely on direct measurement: it is based on a ''mix'' of measurement and extrapolation, where the demographic characteristics of each visitor are estimated based on a variety of visitor-specific signals. Quantcast uses seed data from a panel of users who have disclosed all the relevant demographic data about themselves. Some of the data is only available for the United States subset of the audience. The gender and age data here can be compared with the gender and age data shown in Google Analytics, at Audience > Demographics > Gender and Audience > Demographics > Age respectively. The other characteristics are not reported in Google Analytics.
#* Other relevant sections include: Cross-Platform Card (compares user behavior across platforms), Engagement Card (segments users based on number of visits and reports counts in each segment), and Geographic Card (reports top countries and cities sending traffic). Of these, the Geographic Card can be compared against corresponding data in Google Analytics under Audience > Geo > Location. The Engagement Card can be compared against the data in Google Analytics under Audience > Cohort Analysis. However, the displays do not precisely match.
#* The General Interests Card near the bottom contains a list of similar websites visited by users who visit the website. These can be useful to obtain benchmarks to compare site traffic against. The links point to the Quantcast pages for the websites; however, not every website listed uses Quantcast Measure.
# Record any data you want to reference in the future.
#* Websites may take themselves off of Quantcast Measure, or may stop making their data publicly visible. So you should save or screenshot the page, or record any data you need to, while you can access the data.
#* You can request archival of the existing report using archive.is. Note that the archived page will not have the full functionality of the original page because of limitations in the way archival interacts with JavaScript.

=== SimilarWeb ===

# Get data about the website, if available, at https://www.similarweb.com/website/<domainname>
#* For instance, for the domain zillow.com, you can get data at https://www.similarweb.com/website/zillow.com.<ref name=similarweb-zillow>[https://www.similarweb.com/website/zillow.com SimilarWeb profile for Zillow (zillow.com)]. Retrieved April 26, 2017</ref>
#* In case of subdomains, enter the subdomain name instead of the domain name. For instance, to get data on ocw.mit.edu, you would go to https://www.similarweb.com/website/ocw.mit.edu.<ref name=similarweb-ocw-mit>[https://www.similarweb.com/website/ocw.mit.edu SimilarWeb profile for ocw.mit.edu]. Retrieved April 26, 2017</ref> Data shown for a domain name aggregates data over all subdomains. Profiles for subdomains are fairly similar to profiles for domains, with a few differences: ranks and subdomain breakdowns are available only on domain profiles.
#* For some websites, SimilarWeb may redirect to the error page https://www.similarweb.com/error/notfound. This means that SimilarWeb saw too little traffic to the website and has not built a profile for it.
#* For ''most'' websites, SimilarWeb uses "estimated data", measured by extrapolation from a small panel of users it tracks (and therefore not necessarily accurate). You will see the text "Estimated Data Claim Your Website" on the page in such cases, at the top right of the "Traffic Overview" chart. For a few websites, you will see "Measured by Google Analytics" on the right, indicating that the data is taken from Google Analytics because the website owner connected SimilarWeb with Google Analytics. The feature to connect with Google Analytics is in beta so it may not work properly at any given time.
#* If you have SimilarWeb Pro, you will be able to see more data than the default level of data visible on SimilarWeb.
#* If you want to access historical data, check for archives of the SimilarWeb profile using archive.is.
# Examine the various parts of the traffic report.
#* At the top you can see the rank of the website globally, in its country, and in its category. You can click through to get the list of top websites globally, by country, or by category. The basic SimilarWeb only gives a list of the top 50 websites; with SimilarWeb Pro you can get a longer list. Note that these ranks depend on estimated traffic computation for all websites in the category; since each of the traffic estimates could be inaccurate, the rank could also be inaccurate.
#* The next section, Traffic Overview, includes a plot of total visits over the last six months, by month. To the right of the plot is information on total visits, average visit duration, pages per visit, and bounce rate over the last month. With SimilarWeb Pro, you will be able to get data over the last three years rather than the last six months. For most websites, the data is estimated rather than directly measured; for websites that have connected Google Analytics, the data is measured and says "Measured with Google Analytics" on the top right of the Traffic Overview section.
#* Additional subsections under Traffic Overview include Traffic by countries and Traffic sources. Later sections are Referral, Search, Social, and Display Advertising.
#* The Website Content section provides information on Subdomains, Folders, and Popular Pages. The basic SimilarWeb only shows the top five subdomains. With SimilarWeb Pro, you can see more subdomains, as well as get access to Folders and Popular Pages.
#* The Audience Interests and Similar Sites sections provide more information on related topics and websites.
# Record any data you want to reference in the future.
#* SimilarWeb only shows a six-month history for visits and one month of estimated data for other metrics. Therefore, you should record, by saving or screenshotting, any data you want to reference in the future.
#* You can request archival of the existing profile using archive.is. Note that the archived page will not have the full functionality of the original page because of limitations in the way archival interacts with JavaScript.
# Keep in mind the following regarding error ranges, in cases where the data is estimated and not measured with Google Analytics.
#* The estimated values (for visits and pageviews) reported by SimilarWeb vary between half of and three times the values directly measured by sources such as Quantcast Measure.
#** Glassdoor reported about 40 million visits and 140 million pageviews on Quantcast Measure in March 2017,<ref name=quantcast-glassdoor/> compared with 54.5 million visits and about 200 million pageviews on SimilarWeb in the same time period.<ref name=similarweb-glassdoor>[https://www.similarweb.com/website/glassdoor.com SimilarWeb profit for Glassdoor (glassdoor.com)]. Retrieved April 26, 2017</ref>
#** Trello reported about 46 million visits and 75 million pageviews on Quantcast Measure in March 2017,<ref name=quantcast-trello/> compared with about 85 million visits and 600 million pageviews on SimilarWeb.<ref name=similarweb-trello>[https://www.similarweb.com/website/trello.com/ SimilarWeb profile for Trello (trello.com)]. Retrieved April 26, 2017</ref>
#* Stack Overflow reported about 265 million visits and 660 million pageviews on Quantcast Measure in March 2017,<ref name=quantcast-stackoverflow>[https://www.quantcast.com/stackoverflow.com Quantcast report for Stack Overflow]. Retrieved April 26, 2017</ref> compared with 337 million visits and 1 billion pageviews on SimilarWeb.<ref name=similarweb-stackoverflow>[https://www.similarweb.com/website/stackoverflow.com SimilarWeb profile for Stack Overflow (stackoverflow.com)]. Retrieved April 26, 2017</ref>
#** Upworthy reported 9.6 million visits and 11.3 million pageviews on Quantcast Measure in March 2017,<ref name=quantcast-upworthy>[https://www.quantcast.com/upworthy.com Quantcast report on Upworthy]. Retrieved April 26, 2017</ref> compared with 7.5 million visits and 9.5 million pageviews on SimilarWeb.<ref>[https://www.similarweb.com/website/upworthy.com SimilarWeb profile for Upworthy]. Retrieved April 26, 2017</ref>
#* Accuracy in estimation of visits and pageviews is higher for websites with more traffic, and more unique visitors.
#* Ranks and category ranks should be treated as loose estimates.

=== Alexa Internet ===

# Get data about the website, if available, at http:/www.alexa.com/siteinfo/<domainname>.
#* For instance, for the website zillow.com of Zillow, you can get data at http://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/zillow.com.<ref name=alexa-zillow>[http://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/zillow.com zillow.com traffic statistics from Alexa]. Retrieved April 26, 2017</ref> Similarly, for the website trello.com of Trello, you can get data at http://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/trello.com.<ref name=alexa-trello>[http://www.alexa.com/siiteinfo/trello.com trello.com traffic statistics from Alexa]. Retrieved April 26, 2017</ref>
#* Traffic for subdomains is included in traffic for the main domain, and if you enter a subdomain in the URL structure above, it redirects to the page for the main domain. For instance, http://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/ocw.mit.edu redirects to http://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/mit.edu.
#* For ''most'' websites, Alexa uses estimated data, rather than direct first-party measured data. You will see a box on the top right saying "This site's metrics are estimated" and, below that, "Is this your site? Certify your site's metrics." Some sites have certified their site metrics with Alexa, which means that Alexa uses direct first-party measurement for the site's traffic. However, this only means that Alexa measures the site's traffic correctly; the site's rank is still estimated since that relies on comparison with many other sites, most of which are estimated and not directly measured.
#* Paying users can access more data, including subdomain traffic.
#* If you want historical data, check for archives of the Alexa page on archive.is. 
# Examine the various parts of the page.
#* The top of the page includes a "Global rank" and Rank in the country where the rank is highest. For websites in the top 100,000, historical data on global rank over the past year is also displayed. For others, there is space for the graph but it is not populated.
#* Other sections that show some information are: Audience Geography, engagement data, search traffic and keywords, upstream sites, linking sites, related sites, subdomains, load speed, site description, and audience demographics. The free version only shows the top five results for some of these categories; paying users can access longer lists.
#* Monthly Unique Visitor Metrics and sites people go to next are available to paying users.
#* Notably, there is ''no direct data'' on the number of visitors and pageviews available to non-paying users, even though the ranking is based on those metrics.
#  Record any data you want to reference in the future.
#* Alexa Internet shows a one-year history of the site rank, and moreover, does not show even this data for sites not in the top 100,000.
#* You can request archival of the existing profile using archive.is. Note that the archived page will not have the full functionality of the original page because of limitations in the way archival interacts with JavaScript.
# Keep in mind the following regarding error ranges.
#* Alexa's traffic estimates can be off from first-party measurements by a factor of three in either direction.
#* Since Alexa does not publicly release its traffic estimates, but only releases a rank, the rank should be treated as only a loose estimate.

=== HypeStat ===

# Get data about the website, if available, at <domainname>.hypestat.com
#* For instance, to get data about Imgur, you can visit imgur.com.hypestat.com.<ref name=hypestat-imgur>[http://imgur.com.hypestat.com/ HypeStat profile for imgur.com]. Retrieved April 26, 2017</ref>
#* You can also visit subdomains. For instance, you can visit starwars.wikia.com.hypestat.com to get data on the subdomain starwars.wikia.com under wikia.com.<ref name=hypestat-starwars-wikia>[http://starwars.wikia.com.hypestat.com/ HypeStat profile for starwars.wikia.com]. Retrieved April 26, 2017</ref>
# Examine the various parts of the page.
#* Most of the page is obtained by cobbling together data available from different sources, including Alexa, Quantcast, SEO Majestic, SemRush, Moz, Google PageSpeed Insights, Google Safe Browsing, MyWot.com reputation ratings, and WhoIs lookups.
#* The data includes an estimate for total traffic (daily and monthly unique visitors and pgaeviews). No source is provided for this data. 

=== Website business and advertising pages and intermediaries ==

# Look for information on pages created by the website for potential advertisers.<ref>[https://bloggerspassion.com/check-website-traffic-5-ways-to-determine-traffic-to-a-website/#8_The_business_pages_of_websites_A_good_way_to_track_website_traffic_for_free Check Website Traffic: 9 FREE Ways To Estimate Traffic Of Any Website (8. The business pages of websites: A good way to track website traffic for free)], Anil Agarwal, Bloggers Passion</ref>
#* The page typically has a URL of the form <domainname>/advertise or <domainname>/advertising
#* Some examples of websites that provide some traffic data are BuzzFeed,<ref name=buzzfeed-advertise>[https://www.buzzfeed.com/advertise BuzzFeed Advertise]. Retrieved April 26, 2017</ref> Mashable<ref name=mashable-advertise>[http://mashable.com/advertise/ Advertise with Mashable]. Retrieved April 26, 2017</ref> and Dezeen.<ref name=dezeen-advertise>[https://www.dezeen.com/advertise/ Dezeen advertising information]. Retrieved April 26, 2017</ref
#* One downside is that the data is not automatically updated, and therefore provides only an estimate based on the time the page was updated. You may be able to use the Internet Archive's Wayback Machine to get an estimate of when the page was last updated and how current the data is.
# Contact the website directly using the contact address they provide for advertisers.
#* Some websites offer an email address for potential advertisers to get in touch with them. If you are an advertiser or can represent yourself as asking on behalf of an advertiser, you may be able to use email to get the website owners to share traffic data, or address questions about the nature of their audience.
# Use ad networks or ad planners that the website has hooked to.
#* Google Display Planner can be used to get traffic estimates for some websites.
#* We can use other ad networks sometimes.

