A space for some rough thoughts on approaching mental health and
mental wellness.

## A few quick heuristics

### The more the "fundamental" difficulty of what you are doing (physically, mentally, emotionally) the more the risk to your mental wellness

This might sound obvious, but it is important. If you're living "the
good life", not trying to accomplish anything very ambitious, with
people you get along with, the stressors on your mental health will be
fewer.

On the other hand, if you're on a mission to do something very
difficult, or you're dealing with people you don't get along with, you
are in a position of experiencing greater stress, and your mental
wellness is at greater risk.

One way of visualizing this is as a mental wellness frontier. On one
axis, plot the difficulty of what you are doing. On the other axis,
plot your mental wellness level.

Then, your frontier curve shows how the two variables relate. It's a
downward sloping curve.

The goal of improving mental wellness can be thought of as "frontier
expansion" -- you want to be able to experience greater mental
wellness for tasks of similar difficulty, or, equivalently, you want
to be able to take on tasks of similar difficulty for the same amount
of mental wellness. Which way you make the trade-off after expanding
the curve depends on your value system.

This also means that trying to stretch yourself beyond your current
frontier is a recipe for disaster and dissatisfaction.

### Wealth well spent can reduce effective difficulty and thus move the frontier curve out

Wealth allows you to "buy" your way out of conflict, or avoid conflict
in the first place. It allows you to, for instance, find solutions to
problems such as poor physical environments, leave jobs you don't
like, choose less stressful modes of transportation, afford healthier
foods, etc. Note that wealth in and of itself does not solve problems,
but it does give you the ability to make decisions you otherwise
couldn't. In other words, it effectively moves the frontier out.

### Tackling mental wellness does not automatically solve underlying fundamental difficulties

Let's say you are having trouble communicating with a friend or
colleague, and this is causing you stress and makes you very anxious
when you see that person. The stress and anxiety can be addressed as
mental wellness issues. As you address these, you are in a position to
address the problem of communication difficulties more rationally.

However, solving the stress and anxiety issues will not automatically
give you a solution to your communication issues! It only clears out
some obstacles that prevented you from thinking calmly about the
problem. Once these are gone, you can now think more clearly about
it. Nonetheless, the problem may still turn out to be intractable, or
need other creative approaches that are beyond the scope of mental
wellness.

Sensible mental wellness approaches will acknowledge this, and will
not focus on overly optimistic promise structures (that implicitly
promise solving the underlying problem if only you stop feeling
anxious).

Similarly:

* If you have a vicious cycle between sleeping too little, feeling
  anxiety, and not being able to sleep well, mental wellness
  approaches can tackle the anxiety part. This may be enough to lead
  you to sleep well. But if there are other blockers to sleeping well
  (e.g., you decide to use the freed-up time to party late at night,
  or work extra hours) your sleep situation will not get set right.

(more examples?)

## Mental wellness approaches

Based on my reading of mental wellness approaches, I've classified them as follows:

### Semi-mechanical approaches

These are approaches that might need a few hours of initial training
but after that can be applied relatively mechanically during a time of
stress, or just in anticipation of a stressful situation.

Semi-mechanical approaches are quick and easy to apply in any context
(at home, in the workplace, while traveling, etc.). They will usually
take 1-2 minutes and can be done discreetly without specialized
equipment or without having to excuse oneself from the room.

Examples include:

* Progressive muscle relaxation (PMR)
* Emotional freedom techniques (EFT) tapping
* Some cognitive behavioral techniques (CBT) exercises

To the extent they work, semi-mechanical approaches are the most
valuable because their wide applicability makes them useful anywhere,
any time.

### "Homework" approaches

Homework approaches are things that can be done at home, without
specialized equipment and without a huge amount of skill or willpower,
but usually requiring some investment of continuous, reasonably
focused time.

Some longer-form EFT and CBT is of this kind. Some acupressure
exercises are also of this kind (though simpler ones may be
semi-mechanical).

Homework approaches cannot be used in the moment but they can be used
to identify potential stressors in advance and take the "emotional
edge" off of them. This can complement (not replace) thinking through
how to solve the underlying problems.

### High-skill approaches

These approaches generally require specialized equipment or personnel
or a high level of skill to execute. Examples include getting
counseling (which requires a counselor), mindfulness meditation (which
in theory needs no equipment, but it is very hard for most people to
do), getting a massage, acupuncture. Most of the semi-mechanical
approaches have high-skill variants; indeed, the first iteration may
feel high-skill. But some approaches (like acupuncture) may be more
high-skill all the time.

My take on high-skill approaches is that they are usually not
cost-effective for most people. These approaches require huge resource
investment, but often don't yield good short-term results. They can
increase frustration if used at a time when you are dealing with
mental wellness issues that you are seeking immediate relief from.

### The ideal mix

* Start by aiming to acquire one or two high-value semi-mechanical
  approaches. Get training and guidance and do necessary homework. Use
  these to head off stresses in the moment.

* Also, learn the homework variants of those, to take a more proactive
  approach to dealing with stress.

* Pick up high-skill approaches only after exhausting the low-hanging
  fruit of semi-mechanical and homework approaches. You should go for
  these approaches from a position of strength, without the
  expectation that they will yield immediate return. Also, in many
  cases, you may opt not to go for these approaches at all because of
  the high cost.



