# Comparative retrospective of my life in academia and tech

Drafted September 5, 2022.

Below is an outline of key dimensions of comparison, and my current
thoughts on them; I want to revisit in 2023 before polishing and publishing.

See
https://www.quora.com/Academia/Why-do-people-leave-academia-What-are-the-pros-and-cons-of-leaving-the-field/answer/Vipul-Naik
for background stuff I wrote right after leaving academia.

Overall, I spent 6 years 3 months in academia and 8 years 1 month in
tech job at LiftIgniter / Maven / Arena Group, so both were comparably
long chapters in my life.

## Pay

Academia: Enough to survive, not enough to accumulative savings or
finance meaningful philanthropic endeavors.

Tech job: Enough to both build savings and finance meaningful
philanthropic endeavors (i.e., contract work).

## Teamwork

Academia: very little; everybody is on their own in the sense of
trying to optimize their own career; there is not that much of a
shared team goal one is collaborating with others on. Collaborations
do happen, but they are episodic, e.g., working together on a paper
for a while. I didn't have a lot of these episodic collaborations
either. Teaching is the exception where students depend on one, but
they aren't really collaborators, more like consumers.

Other kinds of academia where there are research labs are probably
different and there's probably comparatively more of a team spirit
there.

Tech job: A lot! We had to work together to keep our startup running,
and even after joining a bigger company there's a sense in which we
are all working toward a shared set of goals.

What's better? To the extent one likes teamwork, tech job is
better. Main downside is that teamwork reduces one's ability to just
take time off and do things at one's own pace since others depend on
one. For me, tech job was a net positive on this front.

## Long-term professional relationships

Academia: Very few long-term relationships, driven partly by my
research area being niche, but also in general by the fact that people
keep moving around: (a) relationship with students is limited to 1-3
quarters, (b) post-docs come and go, (c) academic collaborations are
episodic.

Tech job: Much more long-term relationships not just with colleagues
but also with customers, vendors, etc. There's no innate expectation
that people need to keep moving jobs, and there are strong pressures
to keep the best relationships lasting longer. So although tech job
relationships can also be much shorter, the ones that work well can be
much longer.

Sidenote: I would also say I have been able to keep in better touch
with at least some of my work colleagues after they left, though it
has been quite uneven.

What's better? Tech probably. The length of relationships is organic
and potentially longer.

## Purpose

Academia: The research itself didn't feel purposeful in a broader
scheme. Groupprops felt purposeful locally; teaching felt purposeful
to some extent.

Tech job: There's a lot of bureaucratic pieces but by and large it
felt purposeful.

## Stress, depression, and uncertainty about next steps in life

Academia: The finishing years were stressful. I was also generally
depressed due to being unsure of my life direction. A lot of stress
comes from the fact that I have less flexibility in when to leave (I
should finish Ph.D. and leave -- can't just leave before, and can't
hang around after).

Tech job: There were periods of significant stress but by and large it
was good and I was more mature. I feel less unsure of my life
direction. Even before deciding to switch, I felt that my tech job,
while not ideal, was something I could tolerate doing for as long as
it took me to figure out what next to do in life.

## Public output

Academia: More of my output could be public, including Groupprops, my
thesis, and my teaching notes (I made the lectures and quizzes public;
I kept the assignments and tests private).

Tech job: Very little, due to confidentiality constraints; only
incidental output is public (e.g., StackOverflow, comments on public
GitHub repos, wikiHow articles, Aerospike tech talk).

What's better? Academia, on this front.

## Legacy of work done as part of the job

Academia:

* Research part: None! Very few people care about my thesis, nobody's
  read it cover to cover except maybe me (though one person did
  reference my thesis when replying to my MO question).
* Groupprops: Strong impact, but was it part of the job?
* Teaching part: A little bit, insofar as some people found my notes
  and used them successfully (especially my linear algebra notes) but
  very modest. Direct impact on students relative to counterfactuals
  is probably mildly positive in the near-term, but very little of it
  is lasting.

Tech job:

* Things I did to the tech / codebase will likely stay in the codebase
  for a while, so lasting impact there.

* Work I did to help close customers or achieve business milestones
  will likely survive for a while as the customers will continue to
  stay, so lasting impact there.

* Internal processes I created may survive for a while (though this is
  less clear than code and customers) depending on how the people at
  the company find them.

* My presence helped the company survive, which helped other employees
  keep these jobs (which they like more than the counterfactual job?).

* I might have influenced people's thinking and ways of working (more
  than impact on students or grad school colleagues, because of much
  closer collaboration).

What's better: Tech job, on this front.

## Progress on personal projects

Academia:

* I got a lot more time for personal projects, but this was mostly
  driven by a decision to not continue in academia, which meant that I
  spent less time on research.

* I had less money and less knowledge and skills so I couldn't
  leverage other resources to help me with personal projects.

* Time availability varies across the calendar year, and was
  particularly good in summer.

Tech job:

* I have less time on an ongoing basis for most of the tech job period
  (exception in parts of 2017 and late 2021).

* I have more knowledge and skills + more money, so I can pay other
  people and collaborate with them. The tech job helps partly with the
  knowledge + skills part, but mostly with the money part.

What's better? Unclear; I'd say overall tech job; definitely tech job
is better than academia would have been *if I had been trying to
succeed in academia*. But I do miss being able to disappear for
days/weeks doing personal projects.

## Skills

Academia: Many computer skills, such as more knowledge of TeX,
Mathematica, how to manage courses, etc. Lots of experience teaching
and writing documents related to that. Practice with proofreading
things. More practice with Mediawiki. Most of these were related to
additional things I chose to do rather than the core stuff that was
part of graduate school.

Tech job: GitHub/revision control, Markdown, programming language,
organizing software projects, etc. Lots more in terms of teamwork and
close collaboration.

What's better? Tech job is probably better, but I learned some stuff
in each that wasn't there in the other.

## Clean break

Academia: When I finished my Ph.D., I had a kind of clean start: I was
leaving one city for another, I had wrapped up all obligations, nobody
in academia really missed me.

Tech job: I leave in a much more gradual manner, with a part-time
stint and a lot of knowledge transition, and I expect I'll be missed
and may continue to stay in touch a bit with former colleagues.

What's better? Unclear; on the whole I prefer the driving factors in
the tech job case, but am agnostic about the clean break part itself.
