# How my life has improved

I believe my life has improved in several ways over the past several
years in terms of my life satisfaction and what I can get
done. However, my underlying raw abilities and ethic of hard work
haven't changed. So I've been thinking about what sort of things have
led to the life improvement, and which of those I wish I had just
known several years ago and saved myself a bunch of effort.


For concreteness and convenience, I think of the starting point
against which I am comparing my current state as around 2014, after I
finished my Ph.D. and before I started at
[LiftIgniter](https://vipulnaik.com/liftigniter-experience/). Another
point of comparison is late 2017 to late 2019, which was the height of
my involvement in LiftIgniter and also a period with a lot of
upheavals.

After some thought, I've broken down the changes into five broad
categories:

1. General changes to the world and ecosystem I live in: This includes
   technological changes, changes to social norms, etc.
2. Changes to my specific ecosystem, not directly controlled by me:
   This includes changes at my workplace, or changes to the people I
   know (such as getting to know new people, or losing touch with some
   people).
3. Change to my overall level of material wealth, that allow me to do
   some things that I couldn't previously afford to do.
4. Changes to my own practices and knowledge, that involve the
   acquisition of complicated expertise that can't be easily
   communicated to my past self.
5. Changes to my own practices and knowledge, that are fairly simple
   to communicate to my past self.

While 1-3 are heavily affected by external factors, 4 and 5 are more
internal, and 5 in particular falls under "what I wish my past self
knew" or rather "what I wish others in situations similar to my past
self knew."

There's also interplay between these, for instance, 1 affects 2, both
1 and 2 affect 3 to some extent, and 1 and 2 also affect 4 and 5.

I'm going to talk briefly about each of the categories.

## General changes to the world and ecosystem I live in

### Working from home

The biggest change in the last few years has been a shift to working
from home. For me concretely, this happened starting [March 9,
2020](https://vipulnaik.com/maven-experience/), with the COVID-19
pandemic hitting. Since then I have predominantly worked from home.

Working from home has had several benefits for me. It might deserve
its own blog post some day, but for now, here's a quick bullet summary
of the benefits:

* Reduced fatigue, time, and money cost of commuting:
  * Less daily fatigue from the commute
  * Time saved walking to and from the BART station, as well as the
    lower-productivity and lower-pleasantness time within BART (some
    of which is redirected to exercise that can be done more flexibly)
  * Less money spent on commuting (that can be redirected to other purposes)
* Greater schedule flexibility
  * Ability to maintain a similar waking/sleeping schedule between
    weekdays and weekends
  * Ability to sleep in if fatigued from the day before
  * Fewer interruptions due to the need to commute, e.g., ability to
    work a longer stretch of time in the morning

* Better hygiene and subjective health and reduced health risk:
  * The original motivation for work-from-home, the COVID pandemic,
    applies to diseases other than COVID too: the daily commute and
    extensive office interaction created more risk of communicable
    diseases.
  * Ability to rest and recover from minor irritations and sicknesses
    without endangering others and without the stress of travel

* Less wear-and-tear, accident risk, and theft risk for my stuff:
  * Reduced risk of [laptop and phone theft](https://github.com/vipulnaik/working-drafts/blob/master/laptop-and-phone-theft-and-return-to-normalcy.md)
  * Reduced wear-and-tear, e.g., to shoes (because I can basically
    avoid going out in the rain), my bag, laptop, phone, etc.
  * Reduced risk of accidents

I had underestimated these benefits prior to switching to
work-from-home, partly due to the fact that realizing all the benefits
needed an adjustment period (for instance, figuring out the right
ergonomic setup at home -- initially after switching to work from home
I spent too many hours working on my bed). More importantly, I might
have overestimated the necessity of meeting people in the office (or
maybe not; maybe there are opportunity costs of the switch to
work-from-home I am not aware of).

### Better tech and Internet

Back in 2014, I was using a Windows 8 laptop that was huge, noisy, and
relatively slow. Today I use a M1 Macbook Air that's much smaller,
quieter (fanless), and faster. Even though I'm on a very low-end
smartphone by modern standards, it's still much better than the Nokia
2610 I had back in 2014.

Back in 2014, my home Internet download speed was something like 2
Mbps (about 250 KB/s) and the upload speed was 0.5 Mbps (about 50
KB/s). This was fine for normal browsing but made uploads and
downloads feel slow. My home Internet speeds today are about 100 times
that.

The better tech is significant in improving my day-to-day experience
with work, though most of its benefits are tied to the improved
practices (that fall under points 4 and 5).

## Changes to my specific ecosystem

### Workplace

While a lot of the details aren't things that make sense for me to
talk about publicly, one change I'll highlight is the acquisition of
LiftIgniter, the startup I worked at from 2014 to 2019 as one of the
founding employees. In early 2020, LiftIgniter got acquired
successfully. Although the immediate aftermath of the acquisition was
about the same as life before the acquisition, my workload situation
improved significantly by mid-2021.

### People

Unfortunately, I haven't kept in close touch with many of my friends
in 2014, most of whom had been formed through the Internet.

On the plus side, some of the people I came to know in 2014 and later
became close friends and collaborators. Two people I would highlight
are [Issa Rice](https://issarice.com/) and Sebastian Sanchez, who've
both done a bunch of contract work for me and collaborated with me on
other things.

## Change to my overall level of material wealth

My material wealth has improved over time, initially slowly but more
so in recent years as my pay has increased. This greater material
wealth has allowed me to spend money on things that I might have been
reluctant to spend on earlier. Three examples:

* I started paying for [contract
  work](https://contractwork.vipulnaik.com/) to help further my vision
  beyond the time I could directly spend on it. The contract work
  started in 2015, and was refined over the years.

* Over time, I switched to the idea of buying backups/duplicates of
  stuff before the old version had completely conked out. This
  backup/duplicate approach doesn't cost that much more in the long
  run, but it does have some upfront costs, and the greater material
  wealth helps with that. For instance, in April 2022 I bought a new
  laptop before my old laptop conked out, thereby allowing for a more
  orderly transfer of information, and allowing me to use the old
  laptop as a backup machine as well as a "TV" to use when eating or
  cooking.

* I used my greater material wealth to pay for gaps in house rent when
  housemates moved out during the very difficult rental market during
  the COVID-19 pandemic, and later used the wealth to pay nontrivial
  upfront costs to move to my own apartment. At previous levels of
  material wealth, I may have experienced more panic and strife
  dealing with the housemate situation and probably wouldn't have felt
  comfortable moving to my own apartment.

## Changes to my own practices and knowledge (points 4 and 5)

My practices and knowledge have changed quite a bit since 2014, though
some core elements remain the same. Some of these changes are things
that are hard to communicate to my past self, but others are easy to
communicate. It's hard to sepraate them out categorically, so I'll mix
them together.

### More active self-care (probably something my past self could have understood)

While I was definitely very interested in caring for myself even in
the past, I kept most of the self-care on a kind of auto-pilot,
relying on whatever knowledge/heuristics I had already "organically"
acquired, rather than actively searching for new information on how
best to take care of myself. This led to some situations where I was
in health-suboptimal arrangements for a long time. This came to a head
with [head, neck, jaw and tooth pain in December
2018](https://github.com/vipulnaik/diet-exercise-health/blob/master/notes/2018-12-head-neck-jaw-tooth-pain.md)
that seems to be due to a mix of stress, sleep deprivation, and dental
issues. The dental issues were because my dental care regime had been
based on whatever heuristics/knowledge I previously had, and didn't
take into account active efforts to research and improve the
situation. The sleep deprivation reflected a lack of prioritization in
figuring out a way to get work-related alerts under control (the
challenge here wasn't trivial, but wasn't insurmountable either -- it
just needed to be prioritized in order to be figured out).

Over the period from late 2018 to 2022, I switched to a model of more
active self-care, starting with
[health](https://github.com/vipulnaik/diet-exercise-health), and then
moving to other topics such as
[finances](https://finances.vipulnaik.com/), tracking my [daily
activities](https://updates.vipulnaik.com/), and [tracking my
entertainment consumption](https://ese.vipulnaik.com/).

Why didn't I engage in that much active self-care previously? One main
reason was my intense focus on "others" -- on things like my work and
my projects / altruistic pursuits. This was to some extent a
personality thing on my part, and it was also excerbated by a
genuinely demanding and stressful job that I didn't have good
heuristics for dealing with. I also probably just lacked good
heuristics for active self-care, and had a bit of hubris about it -- a
belief that if there was a problem it would be obvious to me and I
would have enough time to research and fix it after it occurred.

How would I have explained the active self-care to my past self?
Mainly by painting a vision of how, with active self-care, I'd have
fewer major incidents such as the [head, neck, jaw and tooth pain in
December
2018](https://github.com/vipulnaik/diet-exercise-health/blob/master/notes/2018-12-head-neck-jaw-tooth-pain.md). I
would also have highlighted mechanisms by which engaging in acts of
active self-care could pay off, over a reasonable time horizon, in
terms of the value I create for others.

### Better record-keeping, redundancy, and backups

I already had a tendency to good record-keeping and backing things up,
but a lot of that energy was focused on my work, personal projects,
and altruistic pursuits, rather than to taking care of myself.

Over the period of 2015 to 2018, I used my knowledge of GitHub,
markdown, and SQL to figure out a sustainable way of recording
information related to personal projects and altruistic pursuits. A
lot of the specific learnings here were gleaned from Issa Rice, who
did work on some of the personal projects with me.

Over the period from 2018 to 2022, I extended some of these practices
to my personal stuff. I maintained records of my
[health](https://github.com/vipulnaik/diet-exercise-health),
[finances](https://finances.vipulnaik.com/), [daily
activities](https://updates.vipulnaik.com/), and [entertainment
consumption](https://ese.vipulnaik.com/).

I had a big shock in May 2019 when my [laptop
and phone
theft](https://github.com/vipulnaik/working-drafts/blob/master/laptop-and-phone-theft-and-return-to-normalcy.md)
led me to discover that I almost got locked out of some accounts due
to 2-factor authentications. I was able to recover everything, but
this prompted me to better and more robust redundancy practices.

One practice I started following starting 2019 was to keep a list of
installation and recovery steps handy for new computer and phone
devices. I would keep this list up-to-date when I installed new stuff
on existing devices. And the list itself would be backed up to GitHub
and to other devices. This practice was taken from infrastructure best
practices followed at the workplace, where we try to avoid [snowflake
servers](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/SnowflakeServer.html).

While these ideas would have resonated with my past self, and some
specifics would definitely have benefited that past self, I think a
lot of the specific implementation details (such as knowledge of git,
GitHub, MySQL, markdown, scripting, makefiles, etc.) had to come about
with experience. Had I been thinking more explicitly in that
direction, I'd probably have gotten to it faster, though.

### Less of energy highs and high-stress, rushed work

Over 2014 to 2018, I relied on a lot of energy highs to do work. I
would have a hot chocolate most mornings. Although I didn't have it
for the sugar, the sugar content in it did create an energy high (and
also contributed to my dental problems). More generally, I was in a
high-stress, fight-or-flight mode.

While this didn't make me too stressed or snappy as a person (due to
my general tranquility) it wasn't great for my health either. My
general tranquility may have insulated me from seeing the consequences
on my physical health.

After the [head, neck, jaw and tooth pain in December
2018](https://github.com/vipulnaik/diet-exercise-health/blob/master/notes/2018-12-head-neck-jaw-tooth-pain.md),
I gradually weaned myself off of hot chocolate over the next few
months, resulting in a more uniform experience through the day.

Experiences such as a fall in 2014 and another (less hurtful) [fall in
2022](https://github.com/vipulnaik/diet-exercise-health/blob/master/notes/2022-04-05-fall-and-phone-screen-crack.md)
led me to move more slowly and deliberately physically (in particular,
after the first fall in 2014, I reduced my running speed, which
resulted in fewer subsequent falls and in the fall in 2022 being much
milder). This did slow me down overall a little bit, but also reduced
error rates, and overall made me feel more deliberate and in control.

Working from home most of the time and having fewer appointments and
deadlines also reduced my need to be or feel rushed physically or
mentally.

I think I could have convinvced my past self of the value of moving in
this direction to some extent, but probably not all the way (for
instance, some rushedness would exist in a world before work from home).

### Dealing with people

One of my key learnings has been to not have plans that require
nontrivial supererogatory effort from others. This reduces the risk of
being disappointed by or blocked on others.

The insights in the [Chris Voss negotiation
MasterClass](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/CRAzG386t3suSqDgd/chris-voss-negotiation-masterclass-review)
that I consumed in April 2020 were also very useful to me.

### General stuff on causes of stress

I learned to identify and combat [entitlement](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/psMczuJ9KbujgrgLq/entitlement-as-a-major-amplifier-of-unhappiness).

I also learned various techniques for handling [stress in life](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/rBLEiEsNxpQaqwsmJ/miscellaneous-thoughts-on-handling-a-stressful-life).
