# Managing personal projects with a demanding day job

My [day job](https://vipulnaik.com/job/) is pretty demanding (and also
pays well enough). I have a reasonable amount of responsibility and,
in addition to a steady stream of work, there is also the occasional
unexpected work popping up at odd hours.

I have a number of personal projects that I would like to see steady
progress on. Some of the personal projects are things I'm doing on my
own; some are collaborative. Most have a "make the world a bettere
place" flavor, though I don't know if they would be considered
philanthropic or effective altriuist in a typical sense. Some are more
around bookkeeping, but the bookkeeping may be made more important
because of the other projects I'm working on. For instance, I've been
spending a lot of time on financial bookkeeping, and one reason for
that is that my significant expenditure on contract work means I need
to think more about my finances than somebody else with my income
level might.

Dealing with my day job as well as personal projects is a
challenge. My lips are somewhat sealed when it comes to the
strategies I employ on the day job side of this challenge, but I'll
talk about the approaches I am trying to use on the personal project
side, as well as on finding the balance.

Here is a list of ideas:

* Hard time-based separations ("boundaries"), and why I didn't find
  them too practical or useful
* Delegation in personal projects
* Thinking about progress when time levels are very uncertain

## Hard time-based separations ("boundaries"), and why I didn't find them too practical or useful

A common strategy for dealing with what's called work-life balance is
the idea of clear time-based boundaries. For instance, commit to
working within the hours of 9 AM to 6 PM on weekdays, and doing
non-work stuff during other times.

There are two main advantages I see of boundaries. First, the clear
time separation allows for a greater level of focus for each
activity. This reduces the decision overhead, and the greater focus
also means more of a sense of flow, and probably better output. In
this story, during work hours, I can focus more on work, because I
have committed the hours to work. During non-work hours, I can focus
more completely on personal projects. It's a win-win.

Second, a deliberate decision on how to set boundaries might help set
the balance in a proportion that is more suited to what I consciously
want, rather than being swayed by the situation. For instance, let's
say I have observed that, on average, I am spending way more time on
work than I think I should with the right balance. By setting specific
hours for work, I can cap the time I spend on work, reducing the
overwork, and guaranteeing somme minimum amount of time on personal
projects.

There are, however, a few problems with the set hours approach, that I
think outweigh the benefits.

First, a lot of my day job work involves coordination with others,
including coworkers and customers. Different people work in different
timezones. Starting my day early allows me effective coordination with
colleagues on the East Coast of the United States as well as those on
the West Coast who start their day early, deal with questions from
customers in Europe, and also cooordinate with a co-worker based in
South Asia. The majority of my colleagues, though, work roughly 9 AM
to 7 PM. Maintaining some level of availability throughout the day
helps a lot. Cutting down on availability can lead to significant
delays.

For instance, if a colleague who works 11 AM to 7 PM asks me a
question at 5 PM, replying immediately can unblock him for his
remaining two hours of work, whereas waiting till the morning to reply
means he will only be able to act on it the next day.

The second problem has to do with my own mood and energy levels. There
are times when I have the energy to work long hours, and other times
when even getting through a normal work day is difficult, but I do
have a lot of energy to do a fun personal project.

The third problem is that a set hours approach fails to account for
the nature of the job. Fundamentally, the job involves executing on
some responsibilities and deliverables, rather than clocking time. The
way to achieve those deliverables can vary widely over time. Setting
hours in advance can be too crude.

With these problems in mind, here are some things I have adopted
instead:

* Time tracking: I track my time fairly meticulously for my day job,
  and somewhat less meticulously for personal projects. With time
  tracking, I have a rough sense if I am spending more time on work
  than I'd like. While I don't set either minimum targets or caps on
  time spent working, I may, on a case-by-case basis, decide I have
  worked "enough" for the day or "too little" for the day. This would
  be in combination with other factors like work urgency. Time
  tracking has other benefits, mostly around understanding priorities
  within work, but I will skip them here.

* Indulgences: When I have a strong desire to work on a personal
  project, I'll just indulge in it, even during normal work hours,
  while still being available to deal with anything that comes up
  suddenly at work. Conversely, if I feel like wrapping up a work item
  will give me a lot of satisfaction, I might do so even during time
  that I would normally spend on personal projects. Indulgences of
  this kind are sometimes costly, but the feeling of satisfaction
  makes it worth it.

* No promises: My biggest sources of work-related stress have come
  from situations where I had "promised" myself a time of relaxation,
  and then some work popped up at the last minute that took
  precedence. Without the promise (that had gotten my hopes high) I
  would have been better equipped to accept the work. Instead, I
  needeed to figure out other, more indirect, ways to achieve the
  benefits that I was using "promises" to obtain. [Promises are a
  weaker form of boundaries, in the sense that a promise is just a
  determination to apply a boundary in specific instances, but that
  too has proven a source of disappointment.]

## Delegation in personal projects

For the last five years, I've been [funding contract
work](https://contractwork.vipulnaik.com/). A decent share of this
contract work is work that I might have done myself if, let's say, I
didn't have a day job and had all my time available to pursue personal
projects. My day job makes me money but uses my time; by funding
contract work, I am using that money to buy back time, albeit not my
own, to make progress in the personal projects.

In practice, a lot of the stuff I've funded has had slightly different
focus from what I would have done myself. That's partly because the
selection of work fits the strength of the worker. Still, the
framework of the preceding paragraph offers a useful way to think
about why I'm funding contract work.

A couple of considerations come to mind. One is around whether the
value of personal projects to me is centered around me being the
person doing them, or whether delegation gives me the same value. The
answer varies by project; I'm delegating more for the kinds of work
where most of the value is from it getting done than from me
specifically being the doer.

Another is around the time/money tradeoff. Could I take a job that
makes less money but gives me more time for personal projects, so I
can do more direct work on personal projects, and possibly reduce the
contract work I fund? I think there is a good chance that in the
longer term, I will look for lower-paying, less time-intensive jobs,
or possibly even stopping work completely. However, for the near term,
both financial considerations (building a savings buffer) and other
considerations (reduced mobility due to COVID-19, immigration laws
that require me to be in a high-paying job to maintain status) push me
toward maintaining the status quo. I am, however, thinking of
alternatives for the longer term as I get a better sense of the
tradeoff (as well as many other tradeoffs).

At a very high level, my conclusion is that even though I appear to
have paid a lot (~$150,000) for contract work, in fact I expect that
taking a lower-paying job that gives me enough time to do simlar work
myself, I would have lost a comparable amount in forgone wages. If
it's reasonable to take a lower-paying job to have enough time for
pursuits of personal importancee, I think funding contract work is
reasonable. Also, I have gotten betteer over the years at figuring
out what to fund, and at structuring the tasks to be more efficient,
working in close collaboratio with Issa and Sebastian, the main
contract workers.

## Thinking
