# My thoughts on timelines wiki

I have been involved with [timelines
wiki](https://timelines.issarice.com/) both as a contributor of
content and as a funder of other contributors. In this article, I go
over my history with timelines, my thoughts on timelines, why I'm
continuing to contribute in these two ways, and how my relationship
with timelines might evolve over time.

## My history with timelines in general (and with timelines wiki in particular)

### Introduction to timelines on Wikipedia

I have been editing Wikipedia content off and on since the
mid-2000s. In 2013, I discovered and made my [first
edit](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Timeline_of_Facebook&oldid=535051698)
to the (already-existing) timeline of Facebook. The timeline at the
time didn't even have a sortable tabular format; it was just arranged
into sections by year.

In late January and early February of 2014, I started restructuring
the timeline of Facebook into a tabular timeline; the first edit from
January 23 is
[here](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Timeline_of_Facebook&diff=592075328&oldid=591985206)
and the timeline after I finished that round of edits (over about two
weeks) is
[here](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Timeline_of_Facebook&oldid=594236154). The
timeline at that point already reflects many of the hallmarks of
timelines as they now exist on timelines wiki: a big picture-like
section (called "Major trends" by me at the time) and a "Full
timeline" section. At around the same time as I started converting the
timeline of Facebook to a tabular timeline, I also created a timeline
of Twitter
[here](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Timeline_of_Twitter&oldid=592093659),
using the tabular format right at the outset.

I continued adding and editing timelines in tabular format on
Wikipedia, mostly related to technology companies, through 2014 and
2015.

### Contract work for timelines on Wikipedia (April/May 2015 to beginning of March 2017)

In 2015, I started farming out contract work to a couple of people:
[Issa
Rice](https://contractwork.vipulnaik.com/worker.php?worker=Issa+Rice)
and [Alex
K. Chen](https://contractwork.vipulnaik.com/worker.php?worker=Alex+K.+Chen). While
the contract work covered many things, timelines on Wikipedia were one
category of stuff they covered. The first such timeline was the
timeline of Reddit --
[here](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Timeline_of_Reddit&oldid=664650347)
is the completed version that I paid for.

In total, I appear to have spent $2,350 directly on 24 timelines by
Alex K. Chen, all on Wikipedia, in 2015 and 2016 (I also paid for
other non-timeline stuff, that I'm not including here). There were
also additional payments associated with the pages he created
(including pageviews-based payment) that is a bit harder to factor
in. Information on the timelines is on his [worker
page](https://contractwork.vipulnaik.com/worker.php?worker=Alex+K.+Chen).

In April 2016, Sebastian Sanchez responded to my [EA Forum
post](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/yBwTcKHWv9Lgunhrm/looking-for-wikipedia-article-writers-topics-include-many-of)
and started doing contract work for me (Sebastian and I were already
friends on Facebook who had been introduced through a mutual friend,
but we didn't have much communication prior to this). Sebastian has
been doing contract work for me since April 2016 all the way till
2024, as of my time of writing this post. You can see more details on
his [worker
page](https://contractwork.vipulnaik.com/worker.php?worker=Sebastian+Sanchez). Sebastian's
initial work was on Wikipedia, with a large fraction of it being on
timelines, including stuff like timelines of healthcare in specific
countries and timelines of various diseases. The very first timeline
was timeline of cholera; unfortunately, this has since been deleted
from Wikipedia but [here's the oldest version on timelines
wiki](https://timelines.issarice.com/index.php?title=Timeline_of_cholera&oldid=11772)
that was right after it was ported from Wikipedia.

### Exiting Wikipedia and forming timelines wiki (March 2017)

In March 2017, our work on Wikipedia got into trouble because of the
use of payments to sponsor Wikipedia content. While, to my
understanding, we didn't violate Wikipedia policies, the controversy
made it difficult to continue operating. Not only that, a lot of the
existing content was getting deleted, including many health-related
timelines. See the links at the bottom of my [sponsored Wikipedia
editing](https://vipulnaik.com/sponsored-wikipedia-editing/) page.

Issa Rice, who had done some content creation on Wikipedia
and was in general doing a lot of contract work for me at the time,
took the initiative of setting up timelines.issarice.com and migrating
the timelines there, to give us a space to continue working on the
timelines. Thus, timelines wiki was born in March 2017.

I decided to continue my sponsorship of timelines creation and
expansion work by the contract workers (at this point, it was just
Issa Rice and Sebastian Sanchez), with the sponsored work now on
timelines wiki.

### Since then (2017 to present)

Issa's direct editorial contributions to timelines wiki were strong
for the first couple of years, but as his interests morphed, he moved
on to other things, and later took a career break to handle his
chronic illness (see [here](https://issarice.com/about)). Sebastian
has been working mostly steadily on timelines wiki from 2017 to
present (about 2024 as of the time of writing this) though he has also
done some other work, including on [Org
Watch](https://orgwatch.issarice.com/). Over this period of 7+ years,
I appear to have spent over $60,000 on timelines by Sebastian on
timelines wiki. You can see more details on his [worker
page](https://contractwork.vipulnaik.com/worker.php?worker=Sebastian+Sanchez).

I have also spent time off and on creating and editing timelines
myself, though I don't get to pay myself for my timelines.

A few others have created or contributed to isolated timelines on
timelines wiki, including Orpheus Lummis for [timeline of prediction
markets](https://timelines.issarice.com/wiki/Timeline_of_prediction_markets)
and Mati Roy for [timeline of brain
preservation](https://timelines.issarice.com/wiki/Timeline_of_brain_preservation). In
both cases I made one-off payments to them for their work.

Sebastian also did some work on timelines wiki for the Future Fund
Regranting Program until the residual funds were clawed back by the
FTX creditors; see
[here](https://contractwork.vipulnaik.com/payer.php?payer=Future+Fund+Regranting+Program)
for the list of work funded that way.

## Some of the positives of timelines

There are many different angles to thinking about the value of timelines.

Issa Rice provides a good case for timelines on his [portfolio
page](https://issarice.com/portfolio); an excerpt from his explanation
is below:

> Why focus on timelines? I think writing a timeline is a good first
> step in trying to understand a topic, because you don't need to read
> things chronologically (but the output will still be
> chronological). So you can go in confused about a topic and slowly
> get to build a good history of it, piece by piece. It's a way of
> doing "due diligence" on a topic. I think many people try to
> understand a topic without even doing anything comparable to writing
> a timeline, i.e. they just dive in and they don't even know the
> basic events that have happened for that topic, which leaves them
> confused.

> I have also found timelines useful for answering questions.

I'm putting this first because it's a very compact statement that is
quite similar to my (somewhat more rambling) take below.

### Timelines can be built in a very modular fashion and yet present a coherent output

One advantage of timelines is that they can be built in a modular
fashion, in small bits and pieces, and at the end of it all, we get a
chronological account of what happened (with the potential to sort in
other ways). For comparison, a prose summary or more free-form
exposition is a bit harder to construct in a modular fashion.

The modularity of timelines stems from the fact that rows are close to
independent of each other, so it's possible to add rows one at a
time. And it's possible to add rows in between other rows, so the
chronological presentation can be maintained despite the assembly
process being non-chronological.

The fact that the presentation of a timeline is chronological also
takes one variable (the choice of how to order content) out of the
creation process, allowing a focus on other aspects.

This has at least two advantages:

* It is a little more friendly to creators with low attention spans or
  short bursts of time.

* It makes it possible to start working on a timeline with very little
  initial subject matter knowledge, while still producing meaningful
  output along the way.

Both of these advantages were relevant for our journey on timelines
wiki; the second one in particular was important as we've put together
timelines on a range of subjects, many of which we did not have much
knowledge of when we started work on the timelines.

### Making a timeline is a good way to understand a topic, and timelines is a sufficiently generic construct to encompass a wide range of potential topics

I've often created or funded timelines on topics that I wanted to
understand better, and the process of creating or funding the timeline
has helped me along that journey. Some of the topics that I've learned
a lot about while working on timelines for them are [Bay Area Rapid
Transit](https://timelines.issarice.com/wiki/Timeline_of_Bay_Area_Rapid_Transit),
[HTTPS
adoption](https://timelines.issarice.com/wiki/Timeline_of_HTTPS_adoption),
[immigrant processing and visa policy in the United
States](https://timelines.issarice.com/wiki/Timeline_of_immigrant_processing_and_visa_policy_in_the_United_States),
and [AI
safety](https://timelines.issarice.com/wiki/Timeline_of_AI_safety)
(not created by me, but I've been keeping up with expanding it in the
past few years). I even wrote a [timeline of web
vitals](https://timelines.issarice.com/wiki/Timeline_of_web_vitals) to
better understand this topic a few years ago when it became relevant
to my day job and the threads related to it were hard to keep sorted
in my head.

There's something else I have worked on to better understand topics:
subject wikis (shortened to subwiki). I have a large number of them,
most of them not edited much. In fact most of my edits to subject
wikis have been in 2013 or earlier, back when I was doing my Ph.D.
The most high-traffic one is
[Groupprops](https://groupprops.subwiki.org/), which is a reasonably
famous and high-traffic wiki in group theory. It's also huge -- I
spent a lot of time editing Groupprops while doing my Ph.D. You can
get a sense of how much traffic the various subject wikis get and
compare it with timelines wiki by going to
[analytics.vipulnaik.com](https://analytics.vipulnaik.com/); suffice
it to say that Groupprops alone gets over 5 times the traffic that
timelines wiki gets.

I think subject wikis are very powerful and valuable, and I'm glad I
worked on them. I'm also excited to continue working on them and
ramping up that work, perhaps even starting new subject wikis! There's
more to say on that, but I want to highlight here the reason I have
been focusing much more on timelines wiki, both in terms of my own
creative effort and the work I've been funding.

Oftentimes, I have interest in a topic at the level of "I'd like a
basic understanding of topic X", for which "write a timeline of topic
X" or "write timelines for these five topics related to X" is a
relatively low-effort way to get started without a lot of upfront
commitment and investment.

With the subwiki route, there would first be a question of whether
there already is an appropriate subject wiki under which X could be
covered. If not, it would involve setting up a new subject wiki, which
is a big overhead! Even if there is a subject wiki corresponding to X,
the next step would be to fit into the existing guidelines and format
of the subject wiki while writing about X, which can be some work as
every subject wiki follows its own style. And even different kinds of
content within a subject wiki can follow their own style.

So timelines wiki are a good low-effort way to get started exploring a
broad new topic, whereas subwiki is a great way to dig deep into a
topic, particularly if the subwiki already covers related topics.

Back when I was working on my Ph.D., my output was very focused on
getting deep into specific topics (though my input was much
broader). However, since 2014, my interests have moved around more
widely, and having a creative vehicle that can easily be adapted to
fluctuating interests has been important. Timelines wiki has been a
great fit as such as vehicle.

### I found people who can create timelines for money, allowing me to switch from allocating time to allocating money for timelines

With subwiki, while I've had collaborators off and on, I have not yet
found a model of paying for subwiki content whereby another person
could work on it and allow me to use money instead of time to expand
(though Sebastian, who is working on timelines, is interested in
subwiki and we are likely to explore him doing more work on subwiki in
the future).

With timelines wiki, I was fortunate to find people (Alex K. Chen,
Issa Rice, and Sebastian Sanchez being the main ones, though there
have also been many others) who were able to create and expand
timelines in a way that is roughly similar to what I would have wanted
to do myself if I had the time and knowledge. This has allowed me to
spend money instead of time to facilitate the growth of
timelines. This was particularly relevant for the period roughly
between mid-2015 and March 2023, when I was spending a lot of my time
on the day job and didn't have a lot of time to work on content
creation, but had a lot of money (including direct cash flow and
earnings-in-expectation). More on this in the next section.

## Writing versus funding versus reading timelines

### The writer/funder/reader trade-off

With respect to a timeline that I am interested in, I could have one
of three broad categories of roles (and my role could transition from
one to the other over the course of expansions of a particular
timeline):

* Writer/author
* Funder/influencer/reviewer
* Reader/audience

I've mostly been in the first two roles, but occasionally in the third
role (for instance, for expansions on Wikipedia by unaffiliated
people, of timelines originally written or funded by me).

Here's how I compare these:

Role | Time cost | Money cost | Depth of learning | Influence over coverage
-- | -- | -- | -- | --
Writer/author | High | Low (usually zero, occasionally it may involve buying some stuff for source material) | High | High
Funder/influencer/reviewer | Low to moderate | High | Moderate | Moderate to high
Reader/audience | Low | Zero | Low to moderate | Low (usually zero, but it may be possible to share feedback)

This table makes clear a point I made in an earlier section about how
transitioning from writer to funder allows me to spend less time
("High" to "Low to moderate") and monre money ("Low" to "High"). But
the table also highlights another side-effect of transitioning from
writer to funder: my depth of learning is reduced (from "High" to
"Moderate"). My depth of learning per unit time spent, though, likely
goes up ("High/High" to "Moderate/(Low to moderate)"). My influence
over coverage is also reduced somewhat ("High" to "Moderate to high")
though this depends quite a bit on how much influence I *want* to
exert; as a funder, I can exert more influence for the timelines I
care about.
