# Subject wikis (subwiki): selection and value comparison

The personal projects portion of my [standing
plan](https://github.com/vipulnaik/daily-updates/blob/master/standing-plan-for-the-next-few-months.md)
expects a continued focus on the donations list website (DLW) and
migration-related stuff for the rest of 2021. Thinking about the next
projects I would like to take up as I get these two to a logical
point, I am leaning toward focusing on one or more of the subject
wikis (subwiki).

Focused effort on any single subwiki would likely equate to one
project, so given my [heuristic of juggling two projects at a
time](managing-personal-projects-with-a-demanding-day-job.md), I
expect to pick two subject wikis at a time. It's also possible that
I'll conceive of a project of the nature of "fun mathematical subwiki
editing" that is allowed to hop around across multiple subject wikis
all within one project.

My general thinking has evolved quite a bit since I first started work
on subwiki, so I need to think a bit more about the motivation and
mechanics of returning to subwiki.

## My full circle journey to subwiki

### My original journey within subwiki

When I first started graduate school, for the first few years, I spent
a lot of time on subwiki. The vast majority of that time was spent on
Groupprops, but I also spent time developing Calculus, Topospaces,
Commalg, Market, Mech, and a few others. Groupprops related closely to
my research interest in group theory. The others were motivated by
curiosity and interest in the subject matter. Pedagogical motivations
played a role in my focus on Calculus.

Working on subwiki felt exhilerating and rewarding. Think of the kind
of feeling that a person gets from vigorous physical or mental
exercise. It's a bit like that, except that here one also *builds*
something that can be looked back upon -- and built on top of.

### Drift away from subwiki

My gradual drift away from subwiki happened aroun 2013 onward:

* **Altruistic impact**: A big factor was an increasing interest in
  "high-impact" areas, partly due to the influence of ideas like
  effective altruism, as well as interest in migration / open borders.

* **Exit from academic mindset**: Another factor was my shift away
  from academia, which meant being less in a mindset of research,
  pedagogy, and building.

* **Day job offering less continuous time away**: A very busy day job
  played a role. With a busy day job, I had relatively short periods
  of free time, and subwiki requires more continuous time to allow for
  immersion. Back when I had been in academia (before finishing my
  thesis became critical), there were periods of time such as summer
  vacations when I could just focus on subwiki.

* **Competing activities**: I picked up competing activities more
  aligned with the above, further reducing time for subwiki: Wikipedia
  editing (more pageviews, easier to fit a diverse range of interests)
  and, after being booted off Wikipedia, into Timelines Wiki. I also
  started new projects like the Donations List Website (DLW) and
  helped on projects such as AI Watch and Org Watch.

None of these areas gave me that feeling of exhileration and reward
that subwiki had, though they were satisfying in other ways. I also
didn't feel for any of them that it relied on my unique skills and
value add to the world to the same extent that subwiki had. Finally,
in terms of pageviews, subwiki is still second only to Wikipedia in
terms of pageviews, and the subwiki pageviews are less confounded by
counterfactuals.

### Coming back

As my work life settles down and I reduce time on work, some of the
reasons for drifting away have reversed or at least have become less
strong. Let's run through the reasons to understand:

* **Altruistic impact**: Back when I was initially interested in areas
    like migration policy and effective altruism, the domains were
    still relatively nascent and the intellectual communities
    relatively small. I had a sense that I could meaningfully
    contribute with limited time available after work. Now, various
    communities have matured and/or collapsed, and I feel like my
    ongoing participation isn't important (though some of my tools are
    still valuable).

    I also am tentatively leaning toward the view that the ability to
    add unique value and perspective is important, and I feel that I
    can do so more through subwiki, because I have a perspective there
    and the work I do helps flesh out that perspective. Considering
    altruistic impact, though, does affect the *selection* of
    subwiki. My original focus on group theory was most aligned with
    my own interest and passion, but group theory has limited
    altruistic potential. I will discuss the selection of subject wiki
    in a later section.

* **Exit from academic mindset**: While there isn't much direct change
    to this, I do feel like I have more of a "pan-academic" mindset
    now: incorporating the academic virtues of truth-seeking, but not
    academia's institutional qualities. I feel like I can work with
    this pan-academic mindset across many kinds of life environments
    including my present and future ones.

* **Day job offering less continuous time away**: I have reduceed work
    hours at my day job. While I'm currently using the reduced hours
    in a distributed way (rather than taking long, continuous
    stretches of time away from work), I expect to be able to take
    continuous stretches if that turns out to be the bottleneck for
    subwiki. At minimum, even at present I usually have around 1 day
    per week where I am free of nontrivial work and nontrivial
    personal chores, and by arranging the 1 days back-to-back I can
    get 2 contiguous such days.

* **Competing activities**: Some of my competing activities are
    outsourced -- including a lot of work on Timelines Wiki. Some
    others I might be winding down or transitioning. Yet others, like
    Donations List Website, I hope to streamline enough that they'll
    effectively become low-effort chores. Moreover, with my
    alternating projects strategy, I can focus on subwiki for at least
    some time.

## Thinking about the value for each subwiki

There are three pieces I think of around value for each subwiki:

* Personal excitement to me (intellectually and emotionally)
* Appeal to other people in the short term
* Long-term indirect value

### Personal excitement to me (intellectually and emotionally)

Working on Groupprops was personally exciting to me. There were times
when the excitement came from the intrinsic beauty of the material,
and other times when it felt more like doing exercise and felt
satisfying in that sense. Even when it was more rote than beautiful, I
still think my familiarity with the underlying basics of the material
made it more enjoyable for me.

In general, I expect the personal excitement to me to be higher the
closer to mathematics a subject is. There are probably going to be
exceptions, though.

### Appeal to other people in the short term

How much will people use and enjoy the subwiki? I think of this in
terms of four pieces:

* Demand for the stuff to begin with
* Extent of competition
* My unique value-add
* Amount of work I do on the subwiki

Groupprops is by far the subwiki with the most pageviews. It a case of
low-to-moderate demand and low competition, which sort of cancel
out. The two main things where it stands out are my unique value-add
and the amount of work I do on the subwiki.

I think that on many mathematical topics, and maybe also on learning,
my unique value-add will be a little lower than for group theory, but
still pretty high! The amount of work is the main variable I
control. However, many topics, like calculus and machine learning,
have way more demand and way more competition, and that information
would also need to be factored in.

### Long-term indirect value

How does subwiki create altruistic value beyond the short-term value
it provides to people? I think mainly of two channels of indirect impact:

* Value of the domain to progress: Some domains have significant value
  for the world, and subwiki adds to that value by helping people in
  those domains.

  In contrast, if subwiki is only used by school students to get
  better in what is mostly a zero-sum signaling contest, it creates
  very little value for the world.

* Value to shaping people's imagination: The subwiki style of thinking
  about topics can unleash people's imaginations, and help them
  explore and discover related ideas that ultimately makes them better
  people. For instance, think of things like HPMOR or the LessWrong
  sequences.

## Evaluating subwikis

### Calculus subwiki

#### Personal excitement for me of calculus

Moderate/high. Calculus definitely isn't
as thrilling for me as group theory. But it has the same comfort
factor for me in terms of understanding of the basics, which allows me
to explore. I also have experience teaching the material, and the
calculus subwiki is already started so I can pick it up more easily.

#### Appeal to other people in the short term of calculus

* Demand for the stuff to begin with: There's a lot of demand. Most of
  it is driven by school and college curricula.

* Extent of competition: There is a *lot* of competing calculus
  content, much of it more tailored to specific sources of demand (for
  instance, specific school curricula, problem-solving focus).

* My unique value add: My experience with calculus pedagogy, various
  videos I did, as well as a deep understanding of the relationship
  with other areas of mathematics and other sciences helps me offer a
  boutique perspective.

* Amount of work: This is the variable I need to decide. I think about
  six months with this as one of two non-work projects will be needed
  to make a meaningful stride.

#### Long-term indirect value of calculus

Let's look at the two channels of value:

* Value of the domain to progress: Probably not much! Calculus is
  extremely important, but also well understood. The people looking at
  this wiki are highly unlikely to use the information they acquire to
  make the world a better place.

* Value to shaping people's imagination: I think there's a chance that
  there is some value here. Many of the people coming across this
  resource might be students in a zero-sum school or college
  environment, but the fact that they're even Googling and looking for
  resources is a (weak) indicator that they are open to new ideas.

### Machine learning subwiki

### Personal excitement to me of machine learning

My academic involvement with machine learning has been low -- I've
been mostly self-taught and picked it up from friends and the
Internet. I do have relevant work experience though. Working on the
machine learning subwiki will be an opportunity for me to give my
understanding a more rigorous foundation.

Despite my lack of academic grounding, I'm actually pretty confident
of my baseline understanding, as with calculus and group theory.

I find this exciting but maybe a *little* less than calculus, mainly
because of the slight handwavy nature of the pages.

### Appeal to other people in the short term of machine learning

* Demand for the stuff to begin with: Demand is intermediate between
  group theory and calculus. It'll be a mix of college students and
  existing or wannabe data scientists and data / machine learning
  engineers.

* Extent of competition: I think the level of competition is moderate,
  again in betweeen calculus (where there's a lot) and group theory
  (where there's very little).

* My unique value add: Not sure it's super-unique! But I do have some
  experience with both machine learning and with subwiki, and the
  nexus can give me some insights. Also, I can develop this along with
  calculus subwiki (e.g., [gradient descent on
  calculus](https://calculus.subwiki.org/wiki/Gradient_descent) and
  [gradient descent on machine
  learning](https://machinelearning.subwiki.org/wiki/Gradient_descent))
  which allows for a powerful bilingual development of ideas.

* Amount of work: This is the variable I need to decide. I think about
  a year with this as one of two non-work projects will be needed to
  make a meaningful stride. I'm a little farther behind here than with
  calculus, where I already have a basic infrastructure of content.

### Long-term indirect value of machine learning

Let's look at the two channels of value:

* Value of the domain to progress: Machine learning is one of the
  cutting-edge domains affecting progress at current margins. I don't
  expect this subwiki to immediately get to the point of affecting
  that cutting edge, but it is more likely to do it there than with,
  say, calculus.

  AI safety concerns raise a question about the *sign* of machine
  learning progress. As a person with concerns that are somewhat more
  safety-aligned than most people (including my focus on
  interpretability and deep understanding) I expect that the flavor of
  progress that machine learning subwiki will make more likely will be
  a bit better for safety than the coounterfactual.

* Value to shaping people's imagination: I think there is some
  potential here, but honestly I would need to first shape my own
  imagination.

### Learning subwiki

#### Personal excitement to me of learning

Learning holds a "meta" excitement to me -- as I work on the other
subwikis, I think about teaching and learning, which feeds back into
stuff that I can write on learning subwiki.

Unlike calculus and machine learning, I may be doing a lot of indirct
primary, secondary, and tertiary research when writing stuff here --
or just shooting from the hip based on my already-acquired
experiences.

#### Appeal to other people in the short term of learning

* Demand for the stuff to begin with: Demand is moderate but not
  huge. A lot of demand would have to be generated by getting people
  curious about the mechanisms of learning.

* Extent of competition: There isn't a lot of similarly formatted
  competition. There's a lot of material on learning but usually in
  different formats.

* My unique value add: A lot of my unique value add comes from my
  pedagogical experience as well as my work on subwiki.

* Amount of work: I'm guessing six months to a year will be needed.

#### Long-term indirect value of learning

* Value of the domain to progress: Mainstream education is unlikely to
  move at all, but autodidacts and inspired educators can benefit.

* Value to shaping people's imagination: There's a lot of potential
  here. But I would need to get plugged in more to get a sense of the
  potential.

### Market subwiki

#### Personal excitement to me of market

Understanding Econ 101 ideas -- their basic form as well as the
nuances surrounding them -- has always excited me intellectually. It's
not a mathematical Everest, but it stands in the valley between theory
and the real world that gets me excited in a different way.

#### Appeal to other people in the short term of market

* Demand for the stuff to begin with: There's a lot of demand for econ
  stuff -- coming both from school and college kids and from adults
  whose interest is kindled by the econ blogosphere.

* Extent of competition: There's a moderate amount of competition --
  but maybe less than for calculus!

* My unique value add: My unique value add comes from a combination of
  my grasp for economics, my deep understanding of mathematics, my
  wide cross-topic reading, and my knowledge of subwiki.

* Amount of work: I think a six-month period will be good enough to
  get started.

#### Long-term indirect value of market

Let's look at the two channels of value:

* Value of the domain to progress: A calmer understanding of the
  mechanisms of Econ 101 can lead to a calmer, more peaceful
  world. But it's not quite tied to cutting-edge progress.

* Value to shaping people's imagination: Understanding how to think of
  the econ/sociology/psychology junction can shape people's
  imagination on how to understand the world around them in other
  respects as well.

### New subwiki in some topic like logic / model theory

#### Personal appeal to me of logic / model theory

The topic seems moderately fascinating as a pure mathematical topic,
and has a similar appeal as group theory. Unlike group theory, it has
a "meta" flavor to it insofar as it describes how we reason. So that
makes it more exciting.

I think a lot of the things I did organizationally with groupprops
could port over to something on logic / model theory.

#### Appeal to other people in the short term of logic / model theory

* Demand for the stuff to begin with: The math/theory crowd would
  likely be a little smaller than the crowd for group theory, mostly
  because it's less standaard in undergraduatee curricula. But the
  CS/hobbyist crowd would probably be bigger.

* Extent of competition: Not sure! But competition in a wiki-like
  format is rare. Maybe something like n-category cafe. Ultimately
  Wikipedia.

* My unique value add: This mostly comes from my past experience with
  Groupprops leading me to have a picture of how to structure the
  material.

* Amount of work: Since I'm starting from scratch, probably about a
  year!

#### Long-term indirect value of logic / model theory

* Value of the domain to progress: The main channel is likely an
  influence on the design of AI and thinking about AI safety. It would
  be a while before it gets there, though.

* Value to shaping people's imagination: Similar to groupprops, it has
  a kind of artistic beauty and helps us be more self-reflective. More
  so since the topic itself is meta.

### Cellbio subwiki

#### Personal excitement to me of cellbio

Cellbio subwiki, which already exists but is very much in infancy,
would be a radical experiment within subwiki. It's me trying to use
subwiki page creation as a way of learning a topic I have no
demostrated aptitude or intuition for. The main excitement to me is in
its utilitarian value of helping me get a better intuition for
biology. That may ultimately help me personally, but it's more
interesting in terms of helping me understand research on life
extension (a lot of which is cellular).

#### Appeal to other people in the short term of cellbio

* Demand for the stuff to begin with: Moderately high as it's in
  school and college curricula. But unlike calculus I don't think
  people "struggle" with understanding concepts so they won't rush to
  look for online resources that much.

* Extent of competition: Wikipedia is probably pretty good and would
  be hard to beat in coverage (only in presentation).

* My unique value add: This hinges on the subwiki presentation format.

* Amount of work: Since I'm starting from close to scratch and don't
  know much about this, probably about two years.

#### Long-term indirect value of cellbio

* Value of the domain to progress: High, but I don't think a subwik
  helps cutting-edge research much.

* Value to shaping people's imagination: I see this as helpful to
  amateur consumers of biology research to get their bearings on
  what's happening at the cellular level. But it's a ways out from
  that.
