In the context of United States federal taxation, as managed by the [[Internal Revenue Service]], a '''credit elect transfer''' ('''CET'''), also sometimes referred to as a '''credit elect''' or a '''credit elect overpayment transfer''', is the election by a taxpayer (individual or other entity such as business) to apply an overpayment of tax in one tax year to the next tax year.<ref name="irm_21_8">{{cite web|url = https://www.irs.gov/irm/part21/irm_21-005-008r|title = Section 8. Credit Transfers|publisher = Internal Revenue Service|accessdate = September 9, 2023}}</ref><ref name="usc_6402">{{cite web|url = https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/26/6402|title = 26 U.S. Code § 6402 - Authority to make credits or refunds|publisher = Legal Information Institute|accessdate = September 9, 2023}}</ref><ref name="usc_6513">{{cite web|url = https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/26/6513#d|title = 26 U.S. Code § 6513 - Time return deemed filed and tax considered paid (d)Overpayment of income tax credited to estimated tax|publisher = Legal Information Institute|accessdate = September 9, 2023}}</ref><ref name=traderstatus>{{cite web|url = https://traderstatus.com/tax-planning/irs-penalties/credit-elect/|title = Credit Elect|accessdate = September 9, 2023}}</ref><ref name="procedurallytaxing_1">{{cite web|url = https://www.taxnotes.com/procedurally-taxing/complications-rolling-credit-elect-transfers-part-1/2021/02/04/7h6nz|title = Complications With Rolling Credit Elect Transfers – Part 1|publisher = Tax Notes|last = Probasco|first = Bob|date = February 4, 2021|accessdate = September 9, 2023}}</ref>

==Background==

The United States federal government may receive tax payments for tax filers (whether individuals or other entities such as businesses) either through withholding by the entities paying them (for instance, employers withholding taxes for employees) or through estimated tax payments made directly by the tax filer, or through payments made along with the tax return being filed.<ref name="usc_6513"/> Every payment made is credited to a specific tax year: in the case of withholding, the tax year is specified by the entity doing the withholding, and in the case of estimated tax payment (made using the system such as [[Electronic Federal Tax Payment System]] or a paper Form 1040-ES) it is specified by the filer at the time of payment.

If, by or after the due date for filing tax returns for a given year (generally the middle of the fourth month after the end of that year; this is April 15 for taxpayers using the calendar year), the total amount paid ''for that tax year'' is less than the tax due for that tax year, the IRS may levy ''underpayment interest'' on the gap. This interest continues to be levied until the tax filer pays off the remaining amount. On the flip side, if there is an ''overpayment'' of tax for a given year, the IRS does not pay or credit the tax filer with ''overpayment interest''.<ref name="procedurallytaxing_1"/>

== Credit elect transfer and its significance ==

The credit elect transfer is a way for a tax filer to, as part of the tax return, request the overpayment for the tax year (for which the return is being filed) to be applied as an estimated tax payment for the next tax year.

=== How credit elect transfers are done as part of tax returns ===

Individuals filing a [[Form 1040]] tax return, who have an overpayment as of the time of filing, can specify in the "Refund" section of the tax return (Page 2) how much of the overpayment to refund and how much of the overpayment to apply to the next year's estimated tax (i.e., the credit elect transfer amount). <ref name=traderstatus/> For the 2020 Form 1040, the credit elect transfer amount is specified on Line 36.<ref name="mtl"/> Other forms, suchas 1040A, 1120 (for businesses), and 990T (for exempt organizations) have similar sections. Upon receiving and processing the tax return, and assuming that it accepts the calculations in the tax return, the IRS executes on the credit elect transfer, thereby transferring the overpayment from the year for which the tax return is filed, into an estimated tax payment for the next year.<ref name="irm_21_8"/> The IRS follows additional rules regarding what to do if the tax it calculates is different from the tax calculated in the return, and generally sends a notice starting with "CP" explaining what it did differently.<ref name="irm_21_8"/>

Once a credit elect transfer has been executed, the transferred amount is no longer considered an overpayment for the original tax year. There are some limited circumstances in which the credit elect transfer could be reversed, but short of an explicit reversal, the transferred amount is not available to meet any subsequent deficiency determination for tax in the original year.<ref name="traderstatus"/><ref name="mtl"/>

=== Credit elect transfers are applied as of the original filing deadline ===

If the tax return is filed in a timely manner, either before the filing deadline (generally the middle of the fourth month after the end of the tax year) or before the extended filing deadline after filing an extension request before the original filing deadline, a credit elect transfer can be requested. Regardless of the actual date of the filing, the credit elect transfer is assumed to take effect on the filing deadline date. For instance, for individuals using the calendar year for filing taxes, the due date for filing taxes for the past year is April 15, so any credit elect transfer done through a timely-filed return is considered to take effect on April 15. Since April 15 is also the earliest date that estimated taxes are due for individual taxpayers, credit elect transfers effectively credit against the earliest date estimated taxes are due.<ref name=traderstatus/><ref name="usc_6402"/>

The situation for non-timely-filed returns is less clear, as elective transfers are not in general guaranteed to be available for non-timely-filed returns.<ref name="mtl"/>

== Credit elect transfer and subsequent deficiency determination ==

When filing a tax return for an year, the tax filer makes a claim regarding the correct tax that is due for the year. If the return is accepted by the IRS, then the IRS addresses any overpayment of tax (relative to the claimed tax) through some combination of refund and credit elect transfer, based on what the taxpayer requests in the tax return. If the IRS does its own calculations that differ from the taxpayer's, and calculates a different claimed tax, it will still return the overpayment to the taxpayer through some mix of refund and credit elect transfer. Once this is done, there is no loner any overpayment of tax for that tax year.

If at any point after this, there is a "subsequent deficiency determination" whereby the IRS assesses that the correct tax for that tax year should be higher than the claimed tax, then the tax filer is considered to have an underpayment for that tax year, even if the ''original'' amount paid (prior to filing) was enough to cover the deficiency. The legally tricky question is whether this underpayment may be cancelled by overpayments made for later tax years, including as a result of credit elect transfers.

The IRS's position is that overpayment by a tax filer for one tax year cannot be used to cancel out underpayment for another tax year, even if the tax filer, on the whole, has paid more than the total tax across the two years. In other words, the IRS applies the "use-of-money principle" at a per-year level rather than pooled across all years. However, in some cases, such as ''Goldring v. United States'', courts have ruled against the IRS on this point, ruling that the "use-of-money principle" applies to funds pooled across all tax years.<ref name="mtl">{{cite web|url = https://irstaxtrouble.com/avoid-irs-interest/|title = Avoid IRS Interest With Credit Elects|date = October 16, 2021|accessdate = September 9, 2023|publisher = MTL}}</ref><ref name=thetaxadviser>{{cite web|url = https://www.thetaxadviser.com/issues/2022/mar/analyzing-difference-tax-payments-deposits.html|title = Analyzing the difference between tax payments and deposits|last = Keenan|first = John|last2 = Cooper|first2 = Matt|last3 = Abney|first3 = Teresa|publisher = The Tax Adviser|date = March 1, 2022|accessdate = September 9, 2023}}</ref>

== References ==

{{reflist|30em}}
