Mirror of https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E-3_visa released under the [CC-by-SA license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/).

The '''E-3 visa''' is a [[United States]] visa for which only citizens of [[Australia]] are eligible.<ref>{{cite web|title=Qualifying for the E3 visa|url=http://canberra.usembassy.gov/e3visa/qualifying.html|work=E-3 visa|publisher=Embassy of the United States - Canberra, Australia|accessdate=2011-10-22}}</ref> It was created by an Act of the [[United States Congress]] as a result of the [[Australia-United States Free Trade Agreement]] (AUSFTA), although it is not formally a part of the AUSFTA.  The legislation creating the E-3 visa was signed into law by U.S. President [[George W. Bush]] on May 11, 2005.   It is widely believed to have grown out of the negotiation of a trade deal between the USA and Australia.<ref>"The Real Story Behind the New E-3 Visa," by Gary Endelman, http://www.ilw.com/articles/2005,0711-endelman.shtm</ref>

==Description==
The E-3 visa is similar in many respects to the [[H-1B visa]].  Important differences include the fact that spouses of E-3 visa holders may work in the United States without restrictions (unlike other US non-immigrant visas, even the [[TN status|TN visa]] issued to [[Canada|Canadian]] and [[Mexico|Mexican]] citizens), even if they are of a different nationality;<ref>{{cite web|title=PART 41—VISAS: DOCUMENTATION OF NONIMMIGRANTS UNDER THE IMMIGRATION AND NATIONALITY ACT, AS AMENDED § 41.51 Treaty trader, treaty investor, or treaty alien in a specialty occupation - (c) Nonimmigrant E–3 treaty aliens in specialty occupations|url=http://ecfr.gpoaccess.gov/cgi/t/text/text-idx?c=ecfr&sid=b5a2eb4d23abf54fbe73d5b74b974fed&rgn=div5&view=text&node=22:1.0.1.5.27&idno=22#22:1.0.1.5.27.6.1.1|work=Title 22: Foreign Relations|publisher=Electronic Code of Federal Regulations|accessdate=2011-10-22|quote=(2) Spouse and children of treaty alien in a specialty occupation. The spouse and children of a treaty alien in a specialty occupation accompanying or following to join the principal alien are, if otherwise admissible, entitled to the same classification as the principal alien. A spouse or child of a principal E–3 treaty alien need not have the same nationality as the principal in order to be classifiable under the provisions of INA 101(a)(15)(E). Spouses and children of E–3 principals are not subject to the numerical limitations of INA 214(g)(11)(B).}}</ref> that the E-3 visa is renewable indefinitely (in two-year increments); and that the application process is much quicker.  Australian citizens applying for an E-3 visa are also no longer subject to the 65,000 annual visa limit for H-1B visas;  although there is a separate annual quota of 10,500 E-3 visas, this is believed to be much more generous to Australians than requiring them to compete with all other nations for H-1B visas.  (One calculation is that the E-3 guarantees Australians 15% of the combined annual total of US visas for persons in specialty occupations, should they want such visas, even though with a population of approximately 23.4 million Australia accounts for only 0.3% of the world’s non-US population.)<ref>"Frequently-Asked Questions Regarding the 'Australians-Only' E-2 Visa," http://www.usvisalawyers.co.uk/article12.htm</ref> Visas issued to spouses and children are not included in the E3 quota and spouses and children do not need to be Australian citizens.

Although INA § 101(a)(15)(E) requires that all E nonimmigrants maintain an intention to depart the United States upon expiration of their authorized E stay, the guidelines issued by the USCIS state that applications for E classification, including extensions or change of status, cannot be denied solely on the basis of an approved permanent [[labor certification]] or pending or approved immigrant visa petition.<ref>{{cite web|last=Aytes|first=Michael|title=Revisions to Adjudicator’s Field Manual (AFM) Chapters 34.1 and 34.6 (AFM Update AD05-24)|url=https://www.uscis.gov/sites/default/files/USCIS/Laws/Memoranda/Static_Files_Memoranda/Archives%201998-2008/2005/e3polgdnc_121505.pdf|work=Processing Guidelines for E-3 Australian Specialty Occupation Workers and Employment Authorization for E-3 Dependent Spouses|publisher=U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services|accessdate=2016-02-13|date=2005-12-15}}</ref> Therefore, immigrant intent should not be a bar to eligibility for E-3 classification.

The regulations for applying for an E-3 visa were published in the United States Federal Register on September 2, 2005.  Following these procedures will allow an Australian citizen to apply for an E-3 visa at a U.S. embassy or consulate.

Similar to an [[H-1B visa]], the prospective employer of the E-3 visa holder will first apply for a [[Labor Condition Application]] (LCA) with the [[U.S. Department of Labor]], with a note at the top of the form indicating it is for an E-3 visa for an Australian citizen.  After the LCA is approved, the Australian citizen will then apply for the actual visa at a U.S. consulate and then enter the U.S. Australians who are already in the United States on another type of temporary/non-immigrant visa may also apply to change their status to an E-3 visa. Change of visa status is not possible if the applicant has entered the country under the visa waiver program, however, if the applicant has entered on a different visa (F-1 student) then a change of status is allowed.

== Statistics ==
{{update|date=November 2013}}
Since the introduction of the E-3 visas, between 2,000-3,000 E-3 visas have been issued by US consulates to Australian professionals every year; in addition to this, E3R visas are issued to the returning Australian professionals whose original visas had expired. The numbers are as follows: four new visa in Fiscal Year 2005; 1,918 new visas in FY 2006; 2,572 new and 6 returning in FY 2007; 2,961 new and 1,568 returning in FY 2008; and 2,191 new and 1,421 returning in FY 2009. In addition to this, 1,000 to 1,500 E3D visas are issued annually to these professionals' dependents. (Each US fiscal year starts and ends 3 months before the calendar year with the same number).<ref>[http://www.travel.state.gov/pdf/FY09AnnualReport_TableXVI_B.pdf Table (B), Nonimmigrant Visas Issued by Classification (Including Crewlist Visas and Border Crossing Cards): Fiscal Years 2005 - 2009], in [http://www.travel.state.gov/visa/frvi/statistics/statistics_4594.html Report of the Visa Office 2009]</ref>

In U.S. Fiscal Year 2006 (October 2005 through September 2006), which was the first full year during which E-3 regulations were in effect, the U.S. [[Department of Homeland Security]] recorded 2,123 admissions of Australian citizens as E-3 status foreign workers under the treaty.<ref>[https://www.dhs.gov/ximgtn/statistics/publications/YrBk06NI.shtm Supplemental Table 1: Nonimmigrant Admissions (I-94 Only) by Class of Admission and Country of Citizenship: Fiscal Year 2006] {{wayback|url=https://www.dhs.gov/ximgtn/statistics/publications/YrBk06NI.shtm |date=20090830000000 }}</ref> 9,294 admissions were recorded in U.S. Fiscal Year 2007 (October 2006 through September 2007).<ref>[https://www.dhs.gov/ximgtn/statistics/publications/YrBk07NI.shtm Yearbook of Immigration Statistics: 2007] {{wayback|url=https://www.dhs.gov/ximgtn/statistics/publications/YrBk07NI.shtm |date=20091020195523 }}, Supplemental Table 1.</ref>

Importantly, the number of admissions in a given fiscal year is different from the number of visas issued: an E-3 visa is a multiple-entry visa valid for 24 months,<ref>[http://travel.state.gov/visa/frvi/reciprocity/reciprocity_3504.html US Department of State: Australia reciprocity schedule]</ref> and every reentry of the visa holder into the USA (other than after short trips to the "near abroad", i.e. Canada or Mexico) during this time will generate a new [[Form I-94|admission record]].

== Reciprocity ==
The Australian ''[[457 visa|subclass 457 long stay business visa]]'' provides similar working rights in Australia for U.S. citizens.  However this visa is available to any nationality and hence no special work permit for U.S. citizens has been introduced in Australia.

== Permanent residence in Canada ==
Up to 23 August 2010, it was possible to use one year of residence in the United States as a holder of an H1B, H1B1, H1C, or E-3 visa, while employed in an eligible occupation, to obtain provincial nomination from [[Alberta]] for permanent residence in Canada.<ref>[http://www.canadavisa.com/in-the-us-on-an-h1b-Alberta-pnp-has-a-new-option-for-you.html In the U.S. on an H1B? Alberta PNP has a new option for you - no job offer required]</ref>  This was withdrawn due to Alberta being limited to a maximum of 5,000 nominations of any type, at all, under Canada's provincial nominee program.

==History==
The E-3 visa was enacted by section 501 of the Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act for Defense, the Global War on Terror, and Tsunami Relief on May 11, 2005.<ref>http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-109publ13/pdf/PLAW-109publ13.pdf</ref>  (Section 502 of the Act addressed certain visas for nurses.)  Although the bill, H.R. 1268, originated in the House of Representatives, the E-3 visa was added in the Senate's amendment to the House bill.<ref>http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS-109hr1268pp/pdf/BILLS-109hr1268pp.pdf</ref>

The visa was created within the E category of visas.  The [[E-1 visa|E-1]] and [[E-2 visa|E-2]] visas are commonly called the "treaty trader" and "treaty investor" visas.<ref>[http://travel.state.gov/visa/temp/types/types_1273.html Visas for Treaty Traders and Treaty Investors]</ref>  Under the [[Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965|Immigration and Nationality Act]], the E category of visas is reserved for aliens who "enter the United States under and in pursuance of the provisions of a treaty of commerce and navigation between the United States and the foreign state of which he is a national."<ref>8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)(E)</ref>  Australia is eligible for E visas pursuant to a process enacted in the [[Immigration Act of 1990]] (Pub. L. No. 101-649).<ref>{{cite web |url=http://www.americanlaw.com/treatylist.html | title=List of E-1 and E-2 Treaty Countries}}</ref><ref>{{cite web |url=https://fam.state.gov/FAM/09FAM/09FAM040209.html#M402_9_10 | title=9 FAM 402.9-10}}</ref>  Section 204 of that Act authorized E visas for any country that "extends reciprocal nonimmigrant treatment to nationals of the United States," and is either the largest foreign state in a region or an "adversely affected foreign state for purposes of section 314 of the [[Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986]]."  The enactment of the E-3 visa within the E category reflects that the E-3 was closely related to the U.S.-Australia Free Trade Agreement.<ref>{{cite web |url=http://www.austrade.gov.au/E3visa/default.aspx | title=New US Visa Category Created Exclusively for Australians}}</ref>  Although the visa is within the E category, its substantive provisions draw on other provisions of the [[Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965|Immigration and Nationality Act]], including the definitions of a "specialty occupation" and the labor attestation process used for [[H-1B visa|H-1B]] visas.

To enact the E-3 visa, the government of the Commonwealth of Australia worked with Congress and the Bush Administration following the enactment of the U.S.-Australia Free Trade Agreement.<ref>[http://www.trademinister.gov.au/releases/2005/mvt036_05.html New Visa for Australians Opens Up Major Business Opportunities in the United States]</ref>  According to press reports and filings with the U.S. Department of Justice under the [[Foreign Agents Registration Act]], the Washington law firm of [[Covington & Burling|Covington & Burling LLP]] assisted the government of Australia in pursuing the visa legislation.<ref name=autogenerated1>http://www.cov.com/news/detail.aspx?news=1137</ref>  The Covington team included [[Stuart E. Eizenstat|Stuart Eizenstat]], [[Martin B. Gold|Martin Gold]], [[Roderick Allen DeArment|Roderick DeArment]], [[David Marchick]], [[Elizabeth Baldwin Letchworth|Elizabeth Letchworth]], Les Carnegie, and Brian Smith.<ref name=autogenerated1 />

==Other countries==
Although the E-3 visa is reserved exclusively for nationals of Australia, other free trade partners of the United States have reportedly sought similar visas.  Public filings at the U.S. Department of Justice under the [[Foreign Agents Registration Act]] indicate that South Korea is seeking professional visa legislation following the entry-in-force of the [[Free trade agreement between the United States of America and the Republic of Korea|Korea-U.S. Free Trade Agreement]] in March 2012.  On November 20, 2012, the LegalTimes reported that the Embassy of South Korea had hired [[Covington & Burling|Covington & Burling LLP]], which assisted Australia in the development of the E-3 visa, to advise on a similar visa for Korea.  Covington counsel Brian Smith<ref>http://www.cov.com/bdsmith/</ref> and senior international policy adviser [[Alan Larson]]<ref>http://www.cov.com/alarson/</ref> reportedly led the matter, assisted by senior counsel [[Martin B. Gold|Martin Gold]] and associate Jonathan Wakely.<ref>[http://legaltimes.typepad.com/blt/2012/11/covington-assisting-south-korea-on-visa-issue.html Covington Assisting South Korea on Visa Issue - The BLT: The Blog of Legal Times]</ref>

==See also==
*[[Australian nationality law]]
*[[United States Permanent Resident Card]]
*[[H-1B1 visa]], for citizens of Singapore and Chile
*[[TN status]], for citizens of Canada and Mexico

==References==
{{Reflist}}

==External links==
*[http://canberra.usembassy.gov/e3visa.html US Consular Services Australia E-3 Visa Information]
*[http://www.e3visa.info E3 visa information resource]
*[http://www.alberta-canada.com/immigration/immigrating/ainp-srs-US-visa-holder-criteria.html Alberta US Visa Holder criteria]
*[http://alberta.ca/acn/201008/28999A06518CD-06C6-D39F-9FAD5D9909BE595A.html Alberta puts two immigration programs on hold]

{{United States visas}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:E-3 Visa}}
[[Category:United States visas by type]]
[[Category:United States immigration law]]
