'''Erica Baker''' is a female African-American engineer and engineering manager in the San Francisco Bay Area, famous for being outspoken in support of diversity and inclusion. She has worked at companies including [[Google]],[[Slack Technologies|Slack]], and [[Patreon]].<ref name=techcrunch-kickstarter>{{cite web|url = https://techcrunch.com/2017/06/08/kickstarter-hires-slacks-erica-baker-as-director-of-engineering/|title = Kickstarter hires Slack’s Erica Baker as director of engineering|author = Megan Rose Dickey|date = June 8, 2017|accessdate = November 18, 2017|publisher = ''TechCrunch''}}</ref><ref name=usatoday-kickstarter>{{cite web|url = https://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/news/2017/06/08/erica-baker-leaves-slack-kickstarter/102631422/|title = Erica Baker leaves Slack for Kickstarter|last = Guynn|first = Jessica|date = June 8, 2017|publisher = ''[[USA Today]]''}}</ref><ref name=techcrunch-slack>{{cite web|url = https://techcrunch.com/2015/10/14/slack-engineer-erica-baker-diversity-efforts-need-to-extend-beyond-gender/|title = Slack Engineer Erica Baker: Diversity Efforts Need To Extend Beyond Gender|author = Megan Rose Dickey|publisher = ''TechCrunch''}}</ref><ref name=techsesh>{{cite web|url = http://techsesh.co/girl-boss/2017/10/17/wcw-10-18|title = #WCW: Recovering From Emotional Challenges, Doing Aerial Acrobatics, And Loving Donuts|date = October 18, 2017|accessdate = November 18, 2017|publisher = techsesh}}</ref> She attained notoriety in 2015 for revealing that she had started an internal spreadsheet where Google employees reported their salary data, to better understand pay disparities within the company.<ref name=refinery29-google>{{cite web|url = http://www.refinery29.com/2017/09/171485/google-employee-salary-spreadsheet|title = A Google Employee Spreadsheet Shows Pay Disparities Between Men & Women|last = Buxton|first = Madeline|date = September 9, 2017|accessdate = November 18, 2017|publisher = [[Refinery29]]}}</ref><ref name=businessinsider-google>{{cite web|url = http://www.businessinsider.com/Engineer-says-Google-managers-denied-her-bonuses-when-she-tried-to-expose-salary-inequality/articleshow/48120703.cms|title = Engineer says Google managers denied her bonuses when she tried to expose salary inequality|last = Weinberger|first = Matt|publisher = ''[[Business Insider]]''}}</ref><ref name=storify-google>{{cite web|url = https://storify.com/_danilo/ericajoy-s-salary-transparency-experiment-at-googl|title = @EricaJoy's salary transparency experiment at Google|last = Campos|first = Danilo|accessdate = November 18, 2017}}</ref> [[Kara Swisher]] of Re/Code called Baker the "Woman to watch" in a profile in C Magazine.<ref name=c-magazine>{{cite web|url = https://magazinec.com/c-california-style/kara-swisher|title = Kara Swisher|publisher = C Magazine|accessdate = November 18, 2017}}</ref>

== Career ==

===  Google  ===

Baker worked at Google from 2006 to May 2015, in various roles, ending with the role of Site Reliability Engineer (SRE).<ref name=linkedin>{{cite web|url = https://www.linkedin.com/in/ericajoy/|title = Erica Baker|accessdate = November 18, 2017}}</ref> In July 2015, after leaving Google for Slack, Baker revealed in a series of tweets that she had started an internal spreadsheet at Google for employees to disclose their salary information.<ref name=storify-google/> Based on the spreadsheet, a number of her colleagues were able to negotiate pay raises. Baker reported that a number of her colleagues sent her peer bonuses for starting the spreadsheet, but her peer bonuses were denied by management.<ref name=businessinsider-google/><ref name=nyt-google-2>{{cite web|url = https://www.nytimes.com/2017/08/11/technology/google-gender-memo-pichai-damore.html|title = A Crisis Forces Google to Uphold Its Values While Fostering Debate|last = Wakabayashi|first = Daisuke|date = August 11, 2017|accessdate = November 18, 2017|publisher = ''[[New York Times]]''}}</ref><ref>{{cite web|url = https://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2015/07/21/ex-google-employee-exposes-unequal-pay-with-spreadsheet/|title = Ex-Google Employee Exposes Unequal Pay With Spreadsheet|last = Zakrzewski|first = Cat|date = July 21, 2015|accessdate = November 18, 2017|publisher = ''[[Wall Street Journal]]''}}</ref> The spreadsheet sparked discussion on Google's pay disparities, non-transparency in pay determination, and potential gender and ethnicity differentials in pay. The spreadsheet would continue to be updated until 2017, when updated data from the spreadsheet was reported on in the ''[[New York Times]]''.<ref name=nyt-google>{{cite web|url = https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/08/technology/google-salaries-gender-disparity.html|title = At Google, Employee-Led Effort Finds Men Are Paid More Than Women|last = Wakabayashi|first = Daisuke|date = September 8, 2017|accessdate = November 18, 2017|publisher = ''[[New York Times]]''}}</ref><ref name=refinery29-google/>

=== Slack ===

From May 2015 to July 2017, Baker worked as a build and release engineer at Slack.<ref name=linkedin/><ref name=pocit>{{cite web|url = http://peopleofcolorintech.com/interview/pocit-33-erica-baker-part-2/|title = Episode 33 – Erica Baker (Part 2)|accessdate = November 18, 2017}}</ref><ref name=techcrunch-slack/>

=== Kickstarter and Patreon ===

In June 2017, ''[[TechCrunch]]'', and ''[[USA Today]]'' reported that Baker was leaving Slack to join [[Kickstarter]] as directory of engineering, reporting to Lara Hogan, the newly appointed VP of Engineering, and working in [[Brooklyn]].<ref name=techcrunch-kickstarter/><ref name=usatoday-kickstarter/> Although her role did not officially involve diversity and inclusion, Baker said that fostering diversity and inclusion would be part of her job.<ref name=techcrunch-kickstarter/> However, she ended up staying in the San Francisco Bay Area and became Senior Engineering Manager at [[Patreon]].<ref name=techsesh/>

== Work on diversity and inclusion ==

After creating the spreadsheet on Google's salary data and then leaving Google, Baker has been an advocate for diversity and inclusion on her blog and in other public fora. Baker was behind #RealDiversityNumbers, a Twitter movement to get companies reporting numbers around retention, number of lawsuits settled out of court, etc.  She was also critical of [[Salesforce.com]] CEO [[Marc Benioff]]'s remarks that suggested that inclusion efforts for ethnic and racial minorities were taking a backseat so that the company could focus on gender issues.<ref name=techcrunch-slack/> Baker was also included in a ''[[New York Times]]'' profile on women working to track diversity statistics outside their working hours.<ref>{{cite web|url = https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/04/technology/women-in-tech-band-together-to-track-diversity-after-hours.html|title = Women in Tech Band Together to Track Diversity, After Hours|last = Isaac|first = Mike|date = May 3, 2016|accessdate = November 18, 2017|publisher = ''[[New York Times]]''}}</ref>

== See also ==

* [[Tracy Chou]]
* [[Ellen Pao]]

== References ==

{{reflist|30em}}

[[Category:American software engineers]]
[[Category:Living people]]
