'''Family Fairness''' was a program run by the [[Immigration and Naturalization Services]] in the United States from late 1987 to late 1990. The initial version was introduced in late 1987 by then INS Commissioner [[Alan C. Nelson]], working under then Attorney General [[Edwin Meese]] and then President [[Ronald Reagan]].<ref name=nytimes-1/><ref name=latimes-1/> An expansion of the program was introduced in early 1990 by INS Commissioner [[Gene McNary]] working under then Attorney General [[Dick Thornburgh]] and then United States President [[George H. W. Bush]].<ref name=prwatch/><ref name=nytimes-2-1/><ref name=nytimes-2-2/><ref name=latimes-2/><ref name=status-report>{{cite journal|title = Family Fairness: A Status Report|last = Guendelsberger|first = John W.|journal = International Migration Review|volume = 15|year = 1992|pages = 45-57|url = http://www.jstor.org/stable/23143114}}</ref><ref name=aic-house-testimony>{{cite web|url = http://docs.house.gov/meetings/JU/JU00/20150225/103010/HHRG-114-JU00-20150225-SD003.pdf|title = Statement of the American Immigration Council submitted to the Committee on the Judiciary of the U.S. House of Representatives hearing on "The Uncostitutionality of Obama's Executive Actions on Immigration"|date = February 25, 2015|accessdate = February 22, 2017}}</ref><ref name=aic>{{cite web|url = https://www.americanimmigrationcouncil.org/research/reagan-bush-family-fairness-chronological-history|title = Reagan-Bush Family Fairness: A Chronological History|date = December 9, 2014|accessdate = February 5, 2017|publisher = American Immigration Council}}</ref><ref name=huffpo>{{cite web|url = http://www.huffingtonpost.com/marshall-fitz/the-bush-family-fairness-_b_6319760.html|title = The Bush Family Fairness Plan Is the True Precursor to the President’s Executive Actions on Immigration|last = Fitz|first = Marshall|date = December 15, 2014|publisher = ''[[Huffington Post]]''}}</ref><ref name=thehill>{{cite web|url = http://thehill.com/blogs/congress-blog/foreign-policy/219463-when-reagan-and-ghw-bush-took-bold-executive-action-on|title = When Reagan and GHW Bush took bold executive action on immigration|last = Noferi|first = Mark|date = October 2, 2014|accessdate = February 5, 2016|publisher = ''[[The Hill (newspaper)|The Hill]]''}}</ref> The program was created through executive action, in order to meet the problem of "split-eligibility" families created by the [[Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986]], pending legislation that would address the issue.<ref name=aic/> The [[Immigration Act of 1990]] replaced it with a legislatively sanctioned Family Unity Program, that continues to be in force today.<ref name=aic/>

== History ==

=== Background ===

{{further|Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986}}

On November 6, 1986, then-United States President [[Ronald Reagan]] signed the Simpson-Mazzoli [[Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986]]. The Act was the result of a bill sponsored by [[Romano L. Mazzoli]], a Democratic representative from [[Kentucky]], and [[Alan K. Simpson]], a Republican senator from [[Wyoming]], who chaired their respective immigration subcommittees in Congress. The effort was assisted by the recommendations of the bipartisan Commission on Immigration Reform, chaired by Rev. [[Theodore Hesburgh]], then President of the [[University of Notre Dame]]. The bill was passed after several iterations and required compromises between growers' groups, the [[U.S. Chamber of Commerce]], civil rights advocates, and politicians' interest in cracking down on illegal immigration.

Two important classes of people that the Act granted temporary legal status and a path to permanent residency were:<ref name=aic/>

# People continuously present in the United States since January 1, 1982
# Special agricultural workers (SAW)

At the time of the passage of the Act, it was estimated that 3 million people would be eligible to legalize based on these provisions, although the number would rise later. However, the IRCA provided no special provision for legalization for the spouses and children of eligible people if they did not independently qualify; they would have to "wait in line"; however, they might eventually become eligible once the originally eligible applicant had acquired permanent residency or citizenship.<ref name=aic/><ref name=blackman>{{cite web|url = http://joshblackman.com/blog/2016/04/21/more-on-family-fairness/|title = More on Family Fairness|last = Blackman|first = Josh|date = April 21, 2016|accessdate = February 21, 2017}}</ref>

This led to a problem of "split-eligibility" families, where some members of the family were eligible for temporary legal status and others were not. The issue was highlighted by the [[National Conference of Catholic Bishops]], that asked President Ronald Reagan to address the issue. The [[Los Angeles]] Catholic Archdiocese estimated that 30% of the legalization applications it was assisting involved split-eligibility families.<ref name=aic/> Los Angeles Archbishop [[Roger Mahony]] wrote a strongly worded letter to INS Commissioner Alan C. Nelson urging him to address the problem of split eligibility by making spouses and children of eligible people eligible, and capping fees for individuals at $50 and total fees for families at $100.<ref>{{cite web|url = http://articles.latimes.com/1987-04-09/local/me-430_1_amnesty-application|title = 'Favor the Alien' : Mahony Urges Broad INS View of Amnesty|last = Jones|first = Jack|date = April 9, 1987|accessdate = August 3, 2017|publisher = ''[[Los Angeles Times]]''}}</ref>

To address this, [[John Chafee]], a Republican Senator (and former Governor) from [[Rhode Island]] proposed an amendment to an unrelated bill that would give spouses and children of IRCA-eligible individuals a path to legalization. The amendment was defeated by a 55-45 vote, and was the subject of criticism by Alan Simpson (co-sponsor of the original IRCA) who said that the amendment was against the spirit of the original legislation and the careful balance it had struck.<ref name=aic/><ref name=aic-house-testimony/>

=== First announcement ===

Until the announcement of the Family Fairness executive action, the INS interpreted the IRCA strictly: only people who were eligible according to the IRCA rules were provided temporary legal status. On October 21, 1987, [[Alan C. Nelson]], Commissioner of the [[Immigration and Naturalization Services]] at the time, announced the "Family Fairness" executive action. Nelson was working under Attorney General [[Edwin Meese]] and President [[Ronald Reagan]].<ref name=latimes-1>{{cite web|url = http://articles.latimes.com/1987-10-22/news/mn-15817_1_amnesty-program|title = Ineligible Children Face Deportation, INS Says : Such Offspring Can Remain Only if Both Parents Qualify for Amnesty; Spouses Also May Be Ejected|date = October 22, 1987|accessdate = August 3, 2017|last = Getlin|first = Josh|publisher = ''[[Los Angeles Times]]''}}</ref><ref name=nytimes-1>{{cite web|url = http://www.nytimes.com/1987/10/22/us/us-may-let-some-illegals-stay-if-relatives-qualify-for-amnesty.html|title = U.S. May Let Some Illegals Stay If Relatives Qualify for Amnesty|last = Pear|first = Robert|date = October 22, 1987|accessdate = August 3, 2017|publisher = ''[[New York Times]]''}}</ref><ref name=aic/><ref name=factcheck>{{cite web|url = http://www.factcheck.org/2014/11/obamas-actions-same-as-past-presidents/|title = Obama’s Actions ‘Same’ as Past Presidents?|last = Farley|first = Robert|date = November 21, 2014|accessdate = February 22, 2017|publisher = FactCheck}}</ref><ref name=status-report/> The executive action allowed for deferred deportation for:<ref name=factcheck/><ref name=aic/>

* Children under 18 if ''both'' their parents (or the single parent, if they were living with only one parent) were eligible for legal status under IRCA.<ref name=latimes-1/><ref name=nytimes-1/><ref name=aic/><ref name=factcheck/>
* Spouses of IRCA-eligible individuals ''only'' in case of ''compelling or humanitarian factors'', with the fact of marriage alone being insufficient.<ref name=latimes-1/><ref name=nytimes-1/><ref name=aic/><ref name=factcheck/> Describing the executive action to the ''[[New York Times]]'', INS spokesman Gregory J. Leo said that serious illness, handicap, or old age all qualified as compelling humanitarian factors.<ref name=nytimes-1/>

While precise estimates of the impact of the executive action were not available, both the INS and Hispanic groups such as the [[National Council of La Raza]] agreed that it would likely affect upward of 100,000 families.<ref name=nytimes-1/>

In testimony before the House Judiciary subcommittee on immigration, INS Commissioner Alan C. Nelson clarified that no information in the application would be used to initiate deportation proceedings or used in any way against the applicant.<ref name=nytimes-1/>

A number of people thought that the executive action did not go far enough, including Representative [[Howard Berman]],<ref name=latimes-1/> future INS Commissioner [[Doris Meissner]],<ref>{{cite web|url = http://articles.latimes.com/1987-11-05/local/me-18533_1_family-members|title = A Better Fate for Split Families : INS, Tangled in Rules, Misses the Purpose of Amnesty|date = November 5, 1987|accessdate = August 3, 2017|publisher = ''[[Los Angeles Times]]''}}</ref> and United States Catholic Conference immigration lawyer Gilbert Paul Carrasco.<ref name=nytimes-1/>

Legislative efforts to block the deportation of spouses and children of IRCA-eligible individuals would continue to stumble for the next few years.<ref>{{cite web|url = http://articles.latimes.com/1987-12-18/news/mn-20055_1_legal-aliens|title = Panel Supports Splitting Up Alien Families|last = Tumulty|first = Karen|last2 = Johnston|first2 = Ostwald|date = December 18, 1987|accessdate = August 3, 2017|publisher = ''[[Los Angeles Times]]''}}</ref>

=== Second announcement ===

On February 2, 1990, INS Commissioner [[Gene McNary]], working under Attorney General [[Dick Thornburgh]] and newly elected President [[George H. W. Bush]], announced a significant liberalization of the Family Fairness program, effective February 14. The liberalized program would prevent the deportation of most spouses and children of legalized individuals.<ref name=prwatch/><ref name=nytimes-2-1>{{cite web|url = http://www.nytimes.com/1990/02/03/us/new-measure-opens-the-door-a-bit-wider-to-aliens.html|title = New Measure Opens the Door a Bit Wider to Aliens|publisher = [[Associated Press]] via ''[[New York Times]]''|date = February 3, 1990|accessdate = August 3, 2017}}</ref><ref name=nytimes-2-2>{{cite web|url = http://www.nytimes.com/1990/03/05/nyregion/new-policy-aids-families-of-aliens.html|title = New Policy Aids Families of Aliens|last = Howe|first = Marvine|publisher = ''[[New York Times]]''|date = March 5, 1990|accessdate = August 3, 2017}}</ref><ref name=latimes-2>{{cite web|url = http://articles.latimes.com/1990-02-15/local/me-1080_1_family-fairness|title = Immigrants Cautioned on INS 'Family Fairness' Plan|last = Ramos|first = George|date = February 15, 1990|accessdate = August 3, 2017|publisher = ''[[Los Angeles Times]]''}}</ref> Specifically, spouses and children of a legalized alien were eligible for relief from deportation if:<ref name=prwatch>{{cite web|url = http://www.prwatch.org/files/interpreter_releases_feb_5_1990.pdf|title = Interpreter releases: report and analysis of immigration and nationality law|date = February 5, 1990|accessdate = February 22, 2017}}</ref> 

# They were living with the legalized alien
# They had been residing in the United States continuously since November 6, 1986 (and could prove this)
# They were admissible as immigrants
# They had not been convicted of a felony or three or more misdemeanors in the United States
# They had not assisted in persecuting others

McNary clarified that for a spouse to be eligible, the marriage must have occurred before November 6, 1986. He also said that children over 18, though not eligible for this program, would most likely not be deported, and would continue to receive [[voluntary departure (United States)|voluntary departure]] and work authorization.<ref name=prwatch/>

=== Superseding by Family Unity Program ===

The [[Immigration Act of 1990]] included a Family Unity Program (Section 301 of the Act), effective October 1, 1991,<ref name=medical/> that legislatively superseded the Family Fairness Program. The Family Unity Program continues to be active as of 2017.<ref name=aic/><ref name=uscis-fup>{{cite web|url = https://www.uscis.gov/ilink/docView/AFM/HTML/AFM/0-0-0-1/0-0-0-11139/0-0-0-11314.html|title = 24.4 Family Unity Program|publisher = [[United States Citizenship and Immigration Services]]|accessdate = August 3, 2017}}</ref><ref name=medical>{{cite web|url = http://www.e-parc.ca.gov/Letters/Pages/93-14.aspx|title = IMPACT OF THE IMMIGRATION ACT OF 1990, FAMILY UNITY PROVISIONS, ON MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY|publisher = California Department of Health Care Services|date = March 1, 1993|accessdate = August 3, 2017}}</ref>

== Comparison with later deferred action by Obama ==

The Family Fairness program has been compared with executive actions by President [[Barack Obama]], specifically [Deferred Action for Parents of Americans]] (abbreviated DAPA, announced November 20, 2014). The Obama administration, as well as some groups supportive of Obama's deferred action have argued in favor of the similarities, in order to make the case that Obama's deferred action has precedent.<ref name=vox-obama-admin-precedent>{{cite web|url = https://www.vox.com/2014/11/20/7254361/family-fairness-immigration|title = Did George H.W. Bush really pave the way for Obama on immigration?|last = Lind|first = Dara|date = November 20, 2014|accessdate = August 3, 2017|publisher = ''Vox''}}</ref><ref name=aic-house-testimony/><ref name=huffpo/><ref name=thehill/> FactCheck, describing the argument, said: "We can’t speak to whether these actions by previous presidents provide legal precedence for Obama’s actions."<ref name=factcheck/>

On the other hand, Josh Blackman has argued that the Reagan/Bush Family Fairness program differed from Obama's actions in a critical way: the Family Fairness program only provided a "bridge" for people who could eventually qualify for legal status based on already-existing or in-process legislation, whereas Obama's deferred action provided protections for people who did not have any path to legal status with existing legislation.<ref name=blackman/><ref name=blackman-ssrn>{{cite web|url = https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2545544|title = The Constitutionality of DAPA Part I: Congressional Acquiescence to Deferred Action|date = January 6, 2015|accessdate = August 3, 2017|publisher = SSRN|last = Blackman|first = Josh}}</ref><ref>{{cite web|url = http://lawprofessors.typepad.com/immigration/2016/04/dapa-and-a-pragmatic-view-of-work-authorization-and-family-fairness-reply-to-marty-lederman.html|title = Peter Margulies -- DAPA and a Pragmatic View of Work Authorization and Family Fairness: Reply to Marty Lederman|date = April 21, 2016|accessdate = August 3, 2017|last = Margulies|first = Peter}}</ref>

== References ==

{{reflist|30em}}

{{immigration to the United States}}

[[Category: United States immigration law]]
[[Category: Illegal immigration to the United States]]
