'''Form 8938''' is an [[Internal Revenue Service]] form that needs to be included by some [[United States]] persons ([[natural person]]s such as [[citizenship in the United States|citizens]], [[green card|permanent residents]], and [[Substantial Presence Test|residents for tax purposes]], and institutions such as a corporations, partnerships, limited liability companies, trusts and estates) as part of their annual federal income tax return; couples filing jointly submit a single Form 8938 as part of their joint tax return. The criterion is that the filer must have "an interest in specified foreign financial assets and the value of those assets is more than the applicable reporting threshold."<ref name=i8938>{{cite web|url = https://www.irs.gov/instructions/i8938|title =  Instructions for Form 8938 (11/2021)|accessdate = June 16, 2024|publisher = Internal Revenue Service}}</ref>

==Legal basis==

===Legislative basis: IRC Section 6038D===

The legislative basis for Form 8938 is from the [[Internal Revenue Code]] Section 6038D. This section was added as part of the [[Hiring Incentives to Restore Employment Act]] (HIRE Act) of 2010 (PL 111-147, signed into law March 18, 2010);<ref name=hire-act-text/> see the [[#History]] section for more.

Section 6038D of the Internal Revenue Code gives details on how specified foreign financial assets are defined, sets a penalty of $10,000 for noncompliance, and gives a dollar threshold of $50,000 while allowing the Secretary to set higher thresholds; however, it does not specify the form number.<ref name=irc-6038d>{{cite web|url = https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/26/6038D|title = 26 U.S. Code § 6038D - Information with respect to foreign financial assets|accessdate = June 16, 2024|publisher = Legal Information Institute}}</ref>

{{blockquote|(a)In general
Any individual who, during any taxable year, holds any interest in a specified foreign financial asset shall attach to such person’s return of tax imposed by subtitle A for such taxable year the information described in subsection (c) with respect to each such asset if the aggregate value of all such assets exceeds $50,000 (or such higher dollar amount as the Secretary may prescribe).

(b)Specified foreign financial assets
For purposes of this section, the term “specified foreign financial asset” means—
(1)any financial account (as defined in section 1471(d)(2)) maintained by a foreign financial institution (as defined in section 1471(d)(4)), and
(2)any of the following assets which are not held in an account maintained by a financial institution (as defined in section 1471(d)(5))—
(A)any stock or security issued by a person other than a United States person,
(B)any financial instrument or contract held for investment that has an issuer or counterparty which is other than a United States person, and
(C)any interest in a foreign entity (as defined in section 1473).
(c)Required information
The information described in this subsection with respect to any asset is:
(1)In the case of any account, the name and address of the financial institution in which such account is maintained and the number of such account.
(2)In the case of any stock or security, the name and address of the issuer and such information as is necessary to identify the class or issue of which such stock or security is a part.
(3)In the case of any other instrument, contract, or interest—
(A)such information as is necessary to identify such instrument, contract, or interest, and
(B)the names and addresses of all issuers and counterparties with respect to such instrument, contract, or interest.
(4)The maximum value of the asset during the taxable year.
(d)Penalty for failure to disclose
(1)In general
If any individual fails to furnish the information described in subsection (c) with respect to any taxable year at the time and in the manner described in subsection (a), such person shall pay a penalty of $10,000.

(2)Increase in penalty where failure continues after notification
If any failure described in paragraph (1) continues for more than 90 days after the day on which the Secretary mails notice of such failure to the individual, such individual shall pay a penalty (in addition to the penalties under paragraph (1)) of $10,000 for each 30-day period (or fraction thereof) during which such failure continues after the expiration of such 90-day period. The penalty imposed under this paragraph with respect to any failure shall not exceed $50,000.

(e)Presumption that value of specified foreign financial assets exceeds dollar threshold
If—
(1)the Secretary determines that an individual has an interest in one or more specified foreign financial assets, and
(2)such individual does not provide sufficient information to demonstrate the aggregate value of such assets,
then the aggregate value of such assets shall be treated as being in excess of $50,000 (or such higher dollar amount as the Secretary prescribes for purposes of subsection (a)) for purposes of assessing the penalties imposed under this section.
(f)Application to certain entities
To the extent provided by the Secretary in regulations or other guidance, the provisions of this section shall apply to any domestic entity which is formed or availed of for purposes of holding, directly or indirectly, specified foreign financial assets, in the same manner as if such entity were an individual.

(g)Reasonable cause exception
No penalty shall be imposed by this section on any failure which is shown to be due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect. The fact that a foreign jurisdiction would impose a civil or criminal penalty on the taxpayer (or any other person) for disclosing the required information is not reasonable cause.

(h)Regulations
The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations or other guidance as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this section, including regulations or other guidance which provide appropriate exceptions from the application of this section in the case of—
(1)classes of assets identified by the Secretary, including any assets with respect to which the Secretary determines that disclosure under this section would be duplicative of other disclosures,
(2)nonresident aliens, and
(3)bona fide residents of any possession of the United States.}}

===Regulatory basis in the Code of Federal Regulations===

The regulations governing Form 8938 are in 26 CFR § 1.6038D-2 - Requirement to report specified foreign financial assets; other parts of 26 CFR § 1.6038D also cover related information.<ref>{{cite web|url = https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/26/1.6038D-2|title = 26 CFR § 1.6038D-2 - Requirement to report specified foreign financial assets.|accessdate = June 23, 2024|publisher = Legal Information Institute}}</ref> These were added by the IRS through a proposed regulation in November 2011<ref name=federal-register-irs-proposed-regulation/> leading to a final rule published in December 2014.<ref name=federal-register-irs-final-rule/>

==History==

===Introduction of IRC Section 6038D as part of the FATCA portion of the HIRE Act (March 18, 2010)===

Section 511 of the [[Hiring Incentives to Restore Employment Act]] (HIRE Act) of 2010 (PL 111-147, signed into law March 18, 2010) enacted Section 6038D of the [[Internal Revenue Code]]; this created the authority that would lead to the IRS introducing Form 8938.<ref name=hire-act-text>{{cite web|url = https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/PLAW-111publ147/pdf/PLAW-111publ147.pdf|title = Public Law 111–147—Mar. 18, 2010|date = March 18, 2010|accessdate = June 17, 2024}}</ref><ref name=forbes-form-8938>{{cite web|url = https://www.forbes.com/sites/robertwood/2011/11/22/get-ready-for-more-fbar-rules/|title = Get Ready For More FBAR Rules|date = November 22, 2011|accessdate = May 11, 2024|work = Forbes|last = Wood|first = Robert}}</ref><ref name=federal-register-irs-proposed-regulation>{{cite web|url = https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2011/12/19/2011-32263/reporting-of-specified-foreign-financial-assets|title = Reporting of Specified Foreign Financial Assets|date = December 19, 2011|accessdate = June 16, 2024|publisher = Federal Register}}</ref> Specifically, Section 511 is part of Title V ("Offset Provisions") of the HIRE Act, which is called the [[Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act]] (FATCA), Part II ("Under Reporting with respect to Foreign Assets"). The overall goal of FATCA is to address issues of underpayment of taxes on the earnings on foreign financial assets (such as interest and dividend income) in the hope of increased tax revenue that could fund the other provisions of the HIRE Act. Other parts of FATCA would impose reporting requirements on foreign financial institutions about their account holders who are United States persons.


====Distinction in purpose with the FBAR (introduced as part of the Bank Secrecy Act of 1970)====

JCX-4-10, Technical Explanation Of The Revenue Provisions Contained In Senate Amendment 3310, The "Hiring Incentives To Restore Employment Act," Under Consideration By The Senate, published February 23, 2010, contains a technical explanation of the revenue provisions. Among other things, this technical explanation describes the differences in purpose from the FBAR (then TD-F 90-22.1, now [[FinCEN Form 114]]) which also requires reporting on foreign financial accounts. The two forms differ in their reporting thresholds, the way that foreign financial accounts are defined, and purpose. FBAR was part of the [[Bank Secrecy Act]], with the goal of obtaining self-reporting of information with a high degree of usefulness in criminal, tax, or regulatory investigations and proceedings. FATCA and Form 8938, in contrast, are focused on increasing tax compliance for money earned in foreign financial accounts.<ref name=jcx-4-10>{{cite web|url = https://www.jct.gov/publications/2010/jcx-4-10/|title = Technical Explanation Of The Revenue Provisions Contained In Senate Amendment 3310, The "Hiring Incentives To Restore Employment Act," Under Consideration By The Senate|date = February 23, 2010|accessdate = June 17, 2024|publisher = The Joint Committee on Taxation: Congress of United States}}</ref>

===Comment request by the IRS for Form 8938 (November 2010)===

On November 1, 2010, a comment request for Form 8938 by the IRS was published in the ''[[Federal Register]]''. In the comment request, the IRS estimated that the form would be applicable to 350,000 respondents per year and take each respondent an estimated 1 hour 5 minutes, for a total of 378,000 hours per year. The IRS sought comments, with a deadline of January 3, 2011, on: "(a) Whether the collection of information is necessary for the proper performance of the functions of the agency, including whether the information shall have practical utility; (b) the accuracy of the agency's estimate of the burden of the collection of information; (c) ways to enhance the quality, utility, and clarity of the information to be collected; (d) ways to minimize the burden of the collection of information on respondents, including through the use of automated collection techniques or other forms of information technology; and (e) estimates of capital or start-up costs and costs of operation, maintenance, and purchase of services to provide information."<ref>{{cite web|url = https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2010/11/01/2010-27477/proposed-collection-comment-request-for-form-8938|title = Proposed Collection; Comment Request for Form 8938|date = November 1, 2010|accessdate = June 17, 2024|publisher = Federal Register}}</ref>

===Suspension by the IRS of reporting requirements until the release of Form 8938 (June 2011)===

On June 21, 2011, the IRS published a notice (Notice 2011-55; 2011-29 I.R.B. 53) announcing that it planned to introduce Form 8938 "Statement of Specified Foreign Financial Assets" for taxpayers to use to comply with the reporting requirements introduced by the HIRE Act, and also suspending the reporting requirement until the form had been released for use. Instead, the Form 8938 for the suspended taxable year(s) (all taxable years starting after March 18, 2010, the date of passage of the HIRE Act) would need to be attached with the next tax return after the form's availability. This suspension of the reporting requirement was clarified as having no effect on the requirement to file FBAR, then known as TD-F 90-22.1 "Report of Foreign Bank and Financial Accounts" (the form would subsequently migrate to [[FinCEN Form 114]]).<ref>{{cite web|url = https://www.taxnotes.com/research/federal/irs-guidance/notices/irs-suspends-information-reporting-requirements-foreign-financial-assets-some-pfic-interests/1fts9|title = IRS Suspends Information Reporting Requirements For Foreign Financial Assets, Some PFIC Interests.|date = June 21, 2011|accessdate = June 17, 2024|publisher = Tax Notes}}</ref>

===Letter from American Citizens Abroad (ACA) calling for the repeal of FATCA (and therefore the cancellation of Form 8938) (August 2011)===

On August 31, 2011, [[American Citizens Abroad]] (ACA) submitted a letter to the [[Secretary of the Treasury]] seeking the repeal of FATCA (the portion of the HIRE Act that introduced the legal basis for FATCA) and therefore the cancellation of the not-yet-released Form 8938. Specifically on FATCA, the letter said:<ref>{{cite web|url = https://www.woodllp.com/Publications/Articles/pdf/ACA.pdf|title = ACA Letter to Treasury and IRS on ACA repeal FATCA campaign - 08/31/11|date = August 31, 2011|accessdate = June 17, 2024|publisher = American Citizens Abroad}}</ref><ref name=forbes-fatca-repeal>{{cite web|url = Expats Call For FATCA Repeal|last = Wood|first = Robert W.|date = September 6, 2011|accessdate = June 17, 2024}}</ref>:

{{blockquote|The new FATCA requirement for U.S. taxpayers to report foreign financial assets on Form 8938 (to be filed with the 1040) creates a specific discrimination against the community of American citizens overseas as most long-term overseas residents have the majority of their assets abroad. Furthermore Form 8938 unnecessarily duplicates the FBAR filing. The penalties for errors in filing or non-filing are so confiscatory, under both the FATCA and FBAR legislation, that combined they could wipe out 100% of an individual’s assets, even when that person owes no U.S. taxes because they pay taxes overseas. This is undue harsh punishment and anti-constitutional under the 8th Amendment of the Constitution.}}

===Release of a draft Form 8938 (September 2011, with updates in draft form till November 5, 2011)===

The IRS released a draft version of Form 8938 on September 2011,<ref name=forbes-form-8938/> with the last update to this draft December 13, 2011.<ref>{{cite web|url = https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-dft/f8938--dft.pdf|title = DRAFT Form 8938: Statement of Specified Foreign Financial Assets|date = December 13, 2011|accessdate = June 17, 2024|publisher = Internal Revenue Service}}</ref><ref>{{cite web|url = https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-dft/i8938--dft.pdf|title = DRAFT Instructions for Form 8938|date = November 5, 2021|accessdate = June 17, 2024|publisher = Internal Revenue Service}}</ref>

===Proposed regulations from the IRS (December 2011)===

On December 19, 2011, the IRS submitted proposed regulations in the ''[[Federal Register]]'' for implementing the updates in Section 6038D.<ref name=federal-register-irs-proposed-regulation/> The proposed regulations introduced Form 8938 as the form that tax filers needed to submit in order to comply with the reporting requirements of the Act. Further, it relaxed the reporting threshold from $50,000 in a few ways:

* Instead of a blanket threshold of $50,000, the threshold was considered to be met if either of these conditions were satisfied: $50,000 at the end of the taxable year or $75,000 at any time during the taxable year.
* Married couples filing jointly got a doubled threshold to reflect that two individuals are filing together: $100,000 at the end of the taxable year or $150,000 at any time during the taxable year.
* Taxpayers living outside the United States have thresholds that are 4 times the thresholds for others:
** Individuals: $200,000 at the end of the taxable year or $300,000 at any time during the taxable year
** Maried couples filing jointly: $400,000 at the end of the taxable year or $600,000 at any time during the taxable year

The IRS also had a provision that those who did not otherwise need to ''file'' a US tax return did not need to file the tax return just to include Form 8938. The provision still required those with a filing obligation (even if they had zero tax) to include Form 8938.

Corrections to the proposed regulation were published in February 2012.<ref name=federal-register-irs-proposed-regulation-corrections>{{cite web|url = https://www.federalregister.gov/citation/77-FR-9845|title = Reporting of Specified Foreign Financial Assets; Correction|accessdate = June 16, 2024|publisher = [[Federal Register]]}}</ref><ref name=federal-register-irs-final-rule>{{cite web|url = https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2014/12/12/2014-29125/reporting-of-specified-foreign-financial-assets|title = Reporting of Specified Foreign Financial Assets|publisher = [[Federal Register]]|date = December 12, 2014|accessdate = June 16, 2024}}</ref>

===Active use as a tax form starting with the 2011 tax year===

Form 8938 became generally available as a tax form in January 2012, for use for those filing taxes in the 2011 calendar year; this meant that those filing taxes using the calendar year would have to include Form 8938 from the first year it was in use (so Notice 2011-55 didn't really change anything for them); however, Notice 2011-55 would still be relevant for those whose taxable year didn't align with the calendar year.<ref>{{cite web|url = https://web.archive.org/web/20120130225735/https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/f8938.pdf|title = Form 8938: Statement of Specified Foreign Financial Assets|date = January 30, 2012|accessdate = June 17, 2024|publisher = Internal Revenue Service}}</ref><ref name=forbes-form-8938-2012>{{cite web|url = https://www.forbes.com/sites/robertwood/2012/04/04/irs-form-8938-or-fbar/|title = IRS Form 8938 Or FBAR?|last = Wood|first = Robert W.|date = April 4, 2012|accessdate = June 17, 2024|publisher = Forbes}}</ref>

Form 1040 Schedule B for 2011 mentioned Form 8938 for the first time, though not on the main data entry page but rather as a TIP in the instructions for Part III. Part III included questions asking about the FBAR. The left margin for Part III did say "(See instructions on back.)" pointing users to the instructions directly from the form, but did not directly mention Form 8938.<ref name=f1040sb--2011>{{cite web|url = https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-prior/f1040sb--2011.pdf|title = Form 1040 Schedule B: Interest and Ordinary Dividends (2011)|publisher = Internal Revenue Service|accessdate = June 23, 2024}}</ref>

===Final regulation from the IRS (December 2014)===

The corresponding final regulation to the proposed regulation originally published December 2011 would be published in the ''[[Federal Register]]'' on December 12, 2014, and included responses to feedback received; by this time, Form 8938 had already been available for use for the tax years of 2011 to 2013.<ref name=federal-register-irs-final-rule/>

====Responses to feedback on individuals required to report====

The final rule included responses to feedback on individuals required to report:

* Dual resident taxpayers: The IRS agreed with the feedback and concluded that taxpayers filing as nonresidents, using 1040NR (or equivalent) along with Form 8833 would not have to file Form 8938.
* Individuals residing on non-immigrant visas: The IRS rejected the feedback; people on non-immigrant visas who were residents for tax purposes (i.e., they satisfied the [[Substantial Presence Test]]) would still be required to submit Form 8938 if they satisfied the reporting thresholds. The IRS determined that the Substantial Presence Test served the goal of excluding people on short stays, and that a separate exclusion for people on longer-term non-immigrant visas was not warranted.
* Persons that do not owe US taxes for the taxable year: The IRS rejected the feedback requesting that people who did not owe any US taxes for the taxable year be exempted from including Form 8938. However, as in the proposed regulation, the IRS continued to maintain the provision that those who did not otherwise need to ''file'' a US tax return did not need to file the tax return just to include Form 8938.

====Responses to feedback on applicable reporting thresholds====

The final rule included responses to feedback on applicable reporting thresholds:

* Assets received in connection with the performance of personal services: The IRS rejected the feedback that assets received in connection with the performance of personal services should be excluded, due to the difficulty of valuing these assets. However, the IRS did point out that nonvested interests were anyway not included.
* Employees seconded to the United States: The IRS rejected feedback seeking higher reporting thresholds for employees seconded to the United States, for the same reason that it rejected feedback seeking exemption for individuals residing on non-immigrant visas.
* Non-citizen US residents who do not qualify for Section 911 benefits: The IRS rejected feedback "requesting that higher reporting thresholds apply in the case of a non-citizen resident of the United States who would qualify for benefits under section 911(d)(1)(A) if he or she were a U.S. citizen." This was mainly due to the administrability challenge.

====Responses to feedback on interest in a specified foreign financial asset====

The IRS final rule included clarifications in response to requests for clarification on these topics:

* Nonvested property under Section 83: The IRS clarified that a person is considered to have an interest only after either vesting or an 83(b) election.
* Assets held by a disregarded entity: The IRS clarified that foreign financial assets held by a disregarded entity were still considered reportable on Form 8938.
* Jointly owned assets: The IRS clarified that each joint owner for assets owned jointly needed to include the full value of the asset for reporting; however, for married couples who own an account jointly and are filing their return jointly, they just need to include the account once in their Form 8938.

====Comments on the overlap with the FBAR (FinCEN Form 114)====

The IRS final rule adopted the position that Form 8938 still needed to be filled with all reportable accounts even if they were being reported on the FBAR ([[FinCEN Form 114]]). The rationale was that the two forms were in service of different goals, and that therefore even if some information was duplicated, it was not exactly identical between the forms. It also quoted from the HIRE Act (that provided the legal authority for Form 8938) as saying "[n]othing in this provision [section 511 of the HIRE Act enacting new section 6038D] is intended as a substitute for compliance with the FBAR reporting requirements, which are unchanged by this provision."<ref name=jcx-4-10/>

====Other responses and clarifications====

The IRS final rule included clarifications and responses to comments regarding various kinds of "other specified foreign financial assets", clarified the information required to be reported, and provided valuation guidelines, including addressing fair market value, currency conversion, and hard-to-value assets. it also responded to suggestions to relieve filers of Form 8938 reporting requirements if they were filing specific other forms that covered the reportable accounts; in most cases, the IRS rejected these proposals.

===Updated final regulation from the IRS clarifying a few points (February 2016)===

On February 23, 2016, the IRS issued a final regulation providing clarifications in response to some comments on its final rule of December 2014. These clarifications were primarily focused on stuff around the definition and applicable rules for domestic entities.<ref>{{cite web|url = https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2016/02/23/2016-03795/reporting-of-specified-foreign-financial-assets|title = Reporting of Specified Foreign Financial Assets|date = February 23, 2016|accessdate = June 17, 2024|publisher = Federal Register}}</ref>

===Explicit mention in the main page of Form 1040 Schedule B starting tax year 2022===

Tax year 2022 was the first time that Form 1040 Schedule B explicitly mentioned Form 8938 in the main form (rather than only in the instructions); however, this reference was still only in the left margin and not in the form of any question or checkbox that the filer needed to directly interact with.<ref name=f1040sb--2022>{{cite web|url = https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-prior/f1040sb--2022.pdf|title = Form 1040 Schedule B: Interest and Ordinary Dividends (2022)|publisher = Internal Revenue Service|accessdate = June 23, 2024}}</ref>

==Taxpayer awareness and education efforts==

===Mention in Form 1040 Schedule B===

The IRS started mentioning Form 8938 in the instructions for Form 1040 Schedule B starting with tax year 2011<ref name=f1040sb--2011/> and added it in the margin of the form itself starting with tax year 2022.<ref name=f1040sb--2022/>

===Tax prep software===

Form 8938 is ''not'' supported by the IRS Free File option, an option for software-guided tax preparation and submission available to taxpayers making below a threshold amount each year.<ref>{{cite web|url = https://www.irs.gov/filing/free-file-most-commonly-filed-federal-forms-are-available|title = Free File Software - Most Commonly Filed Federal Forms are Available|accessdate = June 23, 2024|publisher = Internal Revenue Service}}</ref> However, it is supported as part of Free File Fillable Forms (an alternative that is available to all taxpayers, but one that offers very little guidance beyond doing basic math); the support has been present since at least as far back as the 2020 tax year.<ref>{{cite web|url = https://web.archive.org/web/20210916123228/https://www.irs.gov/e-file-providers/free-file-fillable-forms-program-limitations-and-available-forms|title = Free File Fillable Forms: Program Limitations and Available Forms|date = September 16, 2021|accessdate = June 23, 2024|publisher = Internal Revenue Service}}</ref>

TurboTax supports Form 8938; it includes a question asking about foreign financial assets and, depending on the answer, applies the filing thresholds to determine if Form 8938 needs to be filed.<ref>{{cite web|url = https://ttlc.intuit.com/turbotax-support/en-us/help-article/tax-forms/file-form-8938-statement-specified-foreign-assets/L3OaimNxB_US_en_US|title = How do I file Form 8938, Statement of Specified Foreign Financial Assets?|accessdate = June 23, 2024|publisher = TurboTax}}</ref> H&R Block also supports filing Form 8938.<ref>{{cite web|url = https://www.hrblock.com/expat-tax-preparation/resource-center/forms/irs-form-8938-what-it-is-and-who-needs-to-file/|title = Get help with Form 8938 instructions from the experts at H&R Block|date = October 25, 2022|accessdate = June 23, 2024}}</ref>

==Filing deadline and penalties==

===Filing deadline===

Form 8938 needs to be filed as part of the federal tax return, so it is subject to the same filing deadline. A timely filed extension request for the federal tax return automatically grants an extension for filing Form 8938 as well.

===Civil penalties for failure to file Form 8938 (none in case of reasonable cause; default of $10,000, up to $50,000 for failure to comply after receiving a notice from the IRS)===

The penalty for failure to file a complete and correct Form 8938 as part of the federal tax return is $10,000 for every affected tax return, as specified by statute in IRC Section 6038D<ref name=irc-6038d/>. The regulations enforcing the penalty are described in the [[Code of Federal Regulations]] at 26 CFR § 1.6038D-8 - Penalties for failure to disclose.<ref name=cfr-26-1-6038d-8>{{cite web|url = https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/26/1.6038D-8|title = 26 CFR § 1.6038D-8 - Penalties for failure to disclose.|accessdate = June 23, 2024|publisher = Legal Information Institute}}</ref>

There is a "reasonable cause" exception specified in 26 CFR § 1.6038D-8(e) that allows the IRS to waive the penalty for taxpayers who can show a reasonable cause for failure to file Form 8938, and that it was not willful neglect. An affirmative showing is required to show reasonable cause, with all facts and circumstances taken into account.<ref name=cfr-26-1-6038d-8/>

The penalty is specified as an exact amount ($10,000) without adjustment for inflation, so that it stays at $10,000 unless amended by statute.<ref name=irc-6038d/> This is in contrast with the FBAR, that also had a penalty of $10,000 for FBAR violations including failure to file or errors in filing, but allowed the penalty to be adjusted by inflation.<ref name=usc-31-5321>{{cite web|url = https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/31/5321|title = 31 U.S. Code § 5321 - Civil penalties|accessdate = May 11, 2024}}</ref><ref name=cfr-31-1010-821>{{cite web|url = https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/31/1010.821|title = 31 CFR § 1010.821 - Penalty adjustment and table.|accessdate = May 11, 2024}}</ref><ref name=p5569>{{cite web|url = https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p5569.pdf|title = IRS Report of Foreign Bank & Financial Accounts (FBAR) Reference Guide|publisher = [[Internal Revenue Service]]|accessdate = May 11, 2024}}</ref>

In case of failure to comply with reporting requirements for Form 8938 within 90 days receiving a notice from the IRS to do so, an additional $10,000 penalty can be charged by the IRS for every 30-day period (or fraction thereof) after the elapsing of the 90 days, up to a total of $50,000.<ref name=cfr-26-1-6038d-8/>

The case law in ''Bittner v. United States'' for the FBAR (FinCEN Form 114) established that there could be a maximum of one violation per reporting period for the FBAR;<ref>{{cite web|url = https://taxschool.illinois.edu/post/fbar-failure-to-file-penalty-bittner-v-u-s/|title = FBAR Failure to File Penalty: Bittner v. U.S.|date = January 29, 2024|accessdate = May 11, 2024}}</ref> while there is no case law for Form 8938, a similar principle applies in practice to Form 8938.{{citation needed}}

===Criminal penalties===

Criminal penalties may be charged over and above the civil penalties for failure to file Form 8938.<ref name=cfr-26-1-6038d-8/>

===Streamlined filing===

The IRS offers a set of procedures called the Streamlined Filing Compliance Procedures that allow taxpayers with non-willful failure to file Form 8938 to voluntarily catch up on Form 8938s from past years. The procedures also cover failure to file Form 8938 as well as failure to pay taxes on the income reported on Form 8938. Taxpayers need to pay all past due taxes and penalties and should not have an ongoing civil examination against them, but do not need to pay Form 8938 penalties for the years being disclosed if their streamlined filing is accepted.<ref name=irs-streamlined-filing>{{cite web|url = https://www.irs.gov/individuals/international-taxpayers/streamlined-filing-compliance-procedures|title = Streamlined Filing Compliance Procedures|accessdate = May 11, 2024|publisher = [[Internal Revenue Service]]}}</ref> The filing process is a little different based on whether the taxpayer is inside or outside the United States:

* Taxpayers inside the United States need to file Form 14654 and pay a miscellaneous offshore penalty of 5% of the maximum account value over the years where the taxpayer failed to file the FBAR or Form 8938 (with a maximum lookback of 6 years for FBAR and 3 years for Form 8938) in addition to any taxes due. This amount replaces the penalty of $10,000 that the taxpayer would otherwise have to pay for each year with a Form 8938 violation. Along with the Form 14654, an amended tax return needs to be included for each of the past three years for which the taxpayer did not originally file Form 8938.<ref>{{cite web|url = https://www.irs.gov/individuals/international-taxpayers/us-taxpayers-residing-in-the-united-states|title = U.S. taxpayers residing in the United States: Eligibility for the Streamlined Domestic Offshore Procedures|accessdate = May 11, 2024|publisher = [[Internal Revenue Service]]}}</ref>
* Taxpayers outside the United States need to file Form 14653. There is no offshore penalty for these users.<ref>{{cite web|url = https://www.irs.gov/individuals/international-taxpayers/us-taxpayers-residing-outside-the-united-states|title = U.S. taxpayers residing outside the United States: Eligibility for the Streamlined Foreign Offshore Procedures|accessdate = May 11, 2024|publisher = [[Internal Revenue Service]]}}</ref>

==References==

{{reflist|30em}}
