'''Grace Crunican''' is a mass transportation specialist currently serving as General Manager of the San Francisco [[Bay Area Rapid Transit]] (BART) District.<ref name=bart-gm>{{cite web|url = https://www.bart.gov/about/gm|title = General Manager|publisher = [[Bay Area Rapid Transit]]|accessdate = July 22, 2017}}</ref><ref name=bart-crunican-selected>{{cite web|url = https://www.bart.gov/news/articles/2011/news20110831|title = Grace Crunican is selected as BART's new General Manager|date = August 31, 2011|accessdate = July 22, 2017|publisher = Bay Area Rapid Transit}}</ref><ref name=crunican-in-line-for-bart-gm>{{cite web|url = http://www.sfgate.com/bayarea/matier-ross/article/Grace-Crunican-in-line-for-post-of-BART-manager-2336218.php|title = Grace Crunican in line for post of BART manager|author = Matier & Ross|date = August 3, 2011|accessdate = July 22, 2017|publisher = ''[[San Francisco Chronicle]]''}}</ref><ref name=crunican-alameda-magazine-profile>{{cite web|url = http://www.alamedamagazine.com/Alameda-Magazine/October-2014/BARTs-No-Nonsense-GM-Grace-Crunican/|title = BART’s No-Nonsense GM Grace Crunican. She handles strikes, deaths on the tracks, and nine bosses to run the aging train system as best she can. Has BART entered a new era?|last = Burnson|first = Robert|date = October 2, 2014|accessdate = July 22, 2017|publisher = ''Alameda Magazine''}}</ref><ref name=examiner-crunican-becomes-gm>{{cite web|url = http://www.sfexaminer.com/grace-crunican-officially-named-new-bart-general-manager/|title = Grace Crunican officially named new BART general manager|date = August 31, 2011|accessdate = July 22, 2017|publisher = SF Examiner}}</ref> She had previously worked for the [[Oregon Department of Transportation]], the [[Federal Transit Administration]] (under the [[presidency of Bill Clinton|Clinton administration]]), and the [[Seattle Department of Transportation]], and also at the mass transit lobbying organization called the Surface Transportation Policy Project.<ref name=bart-gm/><ref name=crunican-in-line-for-bart-gm/>

== Early life and education ==

Crunican was born in [[Beaverton, Oregon]] to Marcus Saunders Crunican and Cora Lee Cunningham<ref name=marcus-crunican-obit>{{cite web|url = http://obits.oregonlive.com/obituaries/oregon/obituary.aspx?pid=165536817|title = Marcus Sanders Crunican|date = June 26, 2013|accessdate = July 22, 2017}}</ref><ref name=crunican-deals-with-unions/> in 1954 or 1955.<ref name=crunican-deals-with-unions/> She has a B.A. from [[Gonzaga University]] and a MBA from [[Willamette University]].<ref name=spur-board-bio/>

== Career ==

=== Early career ===

Crunican began her career in policy in the 1970s in [[Washington, D.C.]]<ref name=crunican-alameda-magazine-profile/>

Her first transportation-related appointment was in 1979 to the Presidential Management Intern Program for the [[U.S. Department of Transportation]]. She then served as a Professional Staffer for the Senate Transportation Appropriations Subcommitee.<ref name=spur-board-bio>{{cite web|url = http://www.spur.org/about/board/grace-crunican|title = Grace Crunican|publisher = SPUR|accessdate = July 22, 2017}}</ref> Among other things, she managed [[TriMet]]'s request for a vintage trolley and downtown street additions in the [[Portland metropolitan area]], [[Oregon]].<ref name=trimet-making-history>{{cite web|url = https://trimet.org/pdfs/history/making-history.pdf|title = Making History: 45 Years of TriMet and Transit in the Portland Region|accessdate = July 22, 2017}}</ref>

Crunican then went on to become Deputy Director and Capitol Project Manager at the Portland Bureau of Transportation,<ref name=trimet-making-history/><ref name=bart-crunican-selected/> where she is credited with increasing dedicated transportation funding from 23% to 55%.<ref name=bart-crunican-selected/><ref name=sjsu-board-profile/>

=== Surface Transportation Policy Project ===

After working at the Portland Bureau of Transportation, Crunican became the Director of the Surface Transportation Policy Project, a nonprofit coalition dedicated to implementing the [[Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act]] of 1991.<ref name=spur-board-bio/><ref name=bart-gm/><ref name=stpp-board-of-directors>{{cite web|url = http://transact.org/columns/|title = STPP Board of Directors: Remembering David Burwell|accessdate = July 22, 2017}}</ref><ref name=crunican-in-line-for-bart-gm/>

=== Federal Transit Administration (under President Bill Clinton) (1993–1996) ===

Crunican served as Deputy Administrator at the [[Federal Transit Administration]] (united the [[United States Department of Transportation]]) from 1993 to 1996, under the [[presidency of Bill Clinton]].<ref name=bart-gm/> While in that role, Crunican negotiated 13 New Start Rail projects worth $3 billion.<ref name=bart-crunican-selected/><ref name=progressive-railroading>{{cite web|url = http://www.progressiverailroading.com/people/news/BART-names-Crunican-new-GM--27818|title = BART names Crunican new GM|publisher = Progressive Railroading}}</ref><ref name=sjsu-board-profile>{{cite web|url = http://transweb.sjsu.edu/mntrc/about/newsletters/2012/fall/nl_1.html|title = Board Profile: Grace Crunican|accessdate = July 22, 2017}}</ref> She also testified twice to the Railroad Safety Committee while in the role.<ref>{{cite web|url = https://www.c-span.org/person/?gracecrunican|title = Grace Crunican|publisher = ''[[C-SPAN]]''|accessdate = July 22, 2017}}</ref>

=== Oregon Department of Transportation (May 1996 – February 2001) ===

Crunican began serving as director of the [[Oregon Department of Transportation]] (ODOT) in May 1996<ref name=odot-audit-report/><ref name=democratherald/><ref name=crunican-resigns-from-odot/> under Governor [[John Kitzhaber]], and was the first female to serve in that role.<ref name=oregon-on-the-move>{{cite web|url = http://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/About/Documents/oregononmove_final.pdf|title = Oregon on the Move: A history of Oregon's transportation systems|accessdate = July 22, 2017|publisher = [[Oregon Department of Transportation]]}}</ref>

In 1999, as ODOT Director, Crunican ordered the formation of "Project Time Team" to cut turnaround time for highway construction projects to 18 months between acceptance of project by city/county and release of advertising for contractor bids.<ref name=oregon-on-the-move/>

Crunican announced her resignation abruptly in January 2001. Her salary at the time of resignation was $118,000. Crunican's resignation came on the heels of two other state agency director resignations, but a spokesman for Governor [[John Kitzhaber]] said that the spate of resignations was coincidental and not part of a purge.<ref name=crunican-resigns-from-odot>{{Cite web|url = http://djcoregon.com/news/2001/01/19/odot-director-issues-surprise-resignation-announcement/|title = ODOT director issues surprise resignation announcement|date = January 19, 2001|accessdate = July 22, 2017|publisher = DJC Oregon}}</ref><ref name=democratherald>{{cite web|url = http://democratherald.com/odot-director-crunican-resigns/article_c0bd671d-4355-56ff-9e1c-f2e6851ecc88.html|title = ODOT director Crunican resigns|publisher = Albany Democrat-Herald|date = January 18, 2001|accessdate = July 22, 2017}}</ref> Crunican's work was praised by Aloha Republican Representative [[Bruce Starr]], who expressed surprise at her resignation, as well as by [[Gary George (Oregon politician)|Gary George]], the Senate Transportation Committee chairman who had previously been critical of ODOT.<ref name=crunican-resigns-from-odot/><ref name=democratherald/> Her resignation was effective February 28, 2001.<ref name=odot-audit-report>{{cite web|url = http://sos.oregon.gov/Documents/audits/full/2001/2001-42.pdf|title = Secretary of State Audit Report Oregon Department of Transportation|date = October 12, 2001|accessdate = July 22, 2017|publisher = Oregon Secretary of State}}</ref>

=== Seattle Department of Transportation (2002–2009)===

Crunican began serving as the Director of the [[Seattle Department of Transportation]] (serving the [[Seattle metropolitan area]]) in 2002, becoming the second person to serve in that role. The Seattle Department of Transportation had been created in 1997 with the name Seattle Transportation Department, and Crunican replaced outgoing director Daryl Grigsby.<ref name=seattle-city-archives>{{cite web|url = https://www.seattle.gov/cityarchives/seattle-facts/city-officials#directordepartmentoftransportation|title = Director, Department of Transportation, Seattle Municipal Archives|accessdate = July 22, 2017}}</ref> While there, Crunican implemented Bridging the Gap (a transportation maintenance levy)<ref name=seattle-times-crunican-resigns>{{cite web|url = http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/seattle-transportation-director-crunican-resigns/|title = Seattle transportation director Crunican resigns|date = December 28, 2009|accessdate = July 22, 2017|publisher = ''[[Seattle Times]]''}}</ref><ref name=spur-board-bio/><ref name=bart-gm/> and the Transit Master Plan (Seattle Connections, Bike Master Plan, Freight Mobility Strategic Plan, and Pedestrian Master Plan), the latter with the goal of helping Seattle achieve the U.S. [[Kyoto Protocol]] goals.<ref name=spur-board-bio/><ref name=bart-gm/>

In 2008, due to a series of heavy snowstorms, Seattle's transportation was paralyzed for a few days, and Crunican's inadequate response to the snowstorm was criticized.<ref name=seattle-times-crunican-resigns/><ref name=case-for-grace>{{cite web|url = https://www.seattlemet.com/articles/2009/12/3/the-case-for-grace|title = The Case for Grace|last = Barnett|first = Erica|date = December 3, 2009|accessdate = July 22, 2017}}</ref><ref name=crunican-alameda-magazine-profile/> Among other things, her decision to use sand instead of salt to clear out the accumulated snow (to limit environmental damage to the Bay) was implicated as a reason for the snow not being cleared out quickly enough.<ref name=crunican-alameda-magazine-profile/> Crunican was also criticized for going on vacation while the snow had not cleared out, and for failing to take responsibility and lacking a customer service mindset.<ref name=seattle-times-crunican-good-riddance>{{cite web|url = http://www.seattletimes.com/opinion/seattle-transportation-chiefs-departure-was-expected/|title = Seattle transportation chief’s departure was expected|date = December 29, 2009|accessdate = July 22, 2017|publisher = ''[[Seattle Times]]''}}</ref>

Despite considerable dissatisfaction at Crunican, Mayor [[Greg Nickels]] refused to fire her, citing her overall positive track record including her work on Bridging the Gap,<ref name=seattle-times-crunican-good-riddance/> a sentiment echoed by other Crunican supporters,<ref name=case-for-grace/> and one he would continue to voice over the years.<ref name=crunican-deals-with-unions/> However, shortly after the mayor's job was turned over to [[Mike McGinn]], Crunican announced on December 28, 2009 that she was resigning and would start her own consulting company.<ref name=seattle-times-crunican-resigns/><ref name=crunican-alameda-magazine-profile/><ref name=seattle-times-crunican-good-riddance/><ref>{{cite web|url = http://westseattleblog.com/2009/12/sdot-announces-grace-crunican-is-resigning/|title = Updates: SDOT announces director Grace Crunican is resigning|date = December 28, 2009|accessdate = July 22, 2017|publisher = West Seattle Blog}}</ref>

=== Hiatus (2010 and half of 2011) ===

At the time of Crunican's resignation from SDOT, it was reported that Crunican was a finalist for a counry administrator job in [[Clackamas County, Oregon]].<ref>{{cite web|url = http://crosscut.com/2009/12/is-grace-crunican-heading-back-oregon/|title = Is Grace Crunican heading back to Oregon?|last = Brewster|first = David|date = December 3, 2009|accessdate = July 22, 2017}}</ref><ref name=seattle-times-crunican-good-riddance/> However, she did not get the job.<ref name=crunican-excessive-exec-comp/>

=== Bay Area Rapid Transit (August 31, 2011 – present) ===

Crunican currently works as general manager for the [[Bay Area Rapid Transit]] (BART) District.<ref name=bart-gm/> BART is a rail-based mass transit system serving the [[San Francisco Bay Area]].

On April 13, 2011, BART announced that General Manager Dorothy Dugger was quitting with extra compensation of $958,000 (severance of $600,000 and exrta compensation of $350,000 for a smooth transition), and BART was beginning the search for a replacement. Dugger's last day at work would be April 22, 2011.<ref>{{cite web|url = http://www.bart.gov/news/articles/2011/news20110413|title = BART general manager resigns; search for new GM begins Thursday|date = April 13, 2011|accessdate = July 22, 2017|publisher = [[Bay Area Rapid Transit]]}}</ref><ref>{{cite web|url = https://ww2.kqed.org/news/2011/04/13/bart-general-manager-dorothy-dugger-resigns-severance-is-958000/|title = BART General Manager Dorothy Dugger Resigns; Severance is $958,000|last = Brooks|first = Jon|date = April 13, 2011|accessdate = July 22, 2017|publisher = ''[[KQED]]''}}</ref><ref>{{cite web|url = http://www.sfgate.com/news/article/BART-s-Dugger-quits-with-1-million-severance-2375176.php|title = BART's Dugger quits with $1 million severance|last = Cabanatuan|first = Michael|date = April 13, 2011|accessdate = July 22, 2017|publisher = ''[[San Francisco Chronicle]]''}}</ref>

In early August, the ''[[San Francisco Chronicle]]'' reported that BART had almost finalized on Grace Crunican as the General Manager.<ref name=crunican-in-line-for-bart-gm/> Board member [[Lynette Sweet]] said that during the interview, Crunican impressed the board by identifying things that the board was doing wrong. Of the board directors, only one, James Fang, voted against her, saying he was unsure whether she knew enough about BART.<ref name=crunican-alameda-magazine-profile/> 

Crunican was formally appointed as General Manager on August 31, 2011.<ref name=bart-crunican-selected/><ref name=examiner-crunican-becomes-gm/> Her initial salary was $300,000.<ref name=crunican-alameda-magazine-profile/> Crunican got a $20,000 raise in annual salary six months later.<ref name=crunican-excessive-exec-comp>{{cite web|url = http://www.beyondchron.org/are-bart-executives-overpaid/|title = Are BART Executives Overpaid?|date = July 10, 2013|accessdate = July 22, 2017|publisher = Beyond Chron}}</ref>

Crunican's first major challenge was labor union strikes as well as deaths that occurred on the tracks due to a train run by a substitute worker during the strikes.<ref name=crunican-alameda-magazine-profile/><ref name=crunican-must-resign-ebx>{{cite web|url = https://www.eastbayexpress.com/oakland/barts-general-manager-should-resign/Content?oid=3767232|title = BART's General Manager Should Resign. The unraveling of the transit agency's contract deal with its unions is yet another example of why Grace Crunican is not qualified for her job|last = Gammon|first = Robert|DUPLICATE_date = ''East Bay Express''|date = November 20, 2013|accessdate = July 22, 2017}}</ref><ref name=mercury-news-2013-accident>{{cite web|url = http://www.mercurynews.com/2013/10/20/national-transportation-safety-board-takes-over-bart-tragedy-investigation/|title = National Transportation Safety Board takes over BART tragedy investigation|last = Hurd|first = Rick|last2 = Debolt|first2 = David|date = October 20, 2013|accessdate = June 20, 2017|publisher = ''The Mercury News''}}</ref><ref>{{cite web|url = http://articles.latimes.com/2013/oct/21/local/la-me-ln-bart-worker-deaths-trainee-20131021|title = Trainee was operating BART train that struck workers, NTSB says|last = Dolan|first = Maura|date = October 21, 2013|accessdate = June 20, 2017|publisher = ''[[Los Angeles Times]]''}}</ref> Crunican pushed back against union demands noting that the money comes from fares and taxpayers, whose interests also need to be protected, but she received criticism for excessive executive compensation.<ref name=crunican-deals-with-unions>{{cite web|url = http://www.sfgate.com/bayarea/article/BART-GM-weighing-needs-of-riders-workers-4646402.php|title = BART GM weighing needs of riders, workers|last = Marinucci|first = Carla|date = July 3, 2013|accessdate = July 22, 2017|publisher = ''[[San Francisco Chronicle]]''}}</ref><ref name=crunican-excessive-exec-comp/><ref name=crunican-must-resign-ebx/><ref>{{cite web|url = https://www.dailykos.com/stories/2013/7/4/1221323/-BART-Union-Rep-Negotiations-Not-Going-Well-Plus-BART-General-Manager-Grace-Crunican-s-Absent|title = BART General Manager Grace Crunican's Broken Promises - UPDATE: BART Service Restored For Now|author = pipsorcle|publisher = ''[[DailyKos]]''|date = July 4, 2013|accessdate = July 22, 2017}}</ref>

Crunican oversaw replacement of the BART train seats to vinyl ones that were more hygienic and easy to clean,<ref name=crunican-alameda-magazine-profile/> and the award of a contract to [[Bombardier Transportation]] in 2012 for the delivery of new train cars.<ref name=crunican-alameda-magazine-profile/><ref name=bart-train-cars-delivery-plan>{{cite web|url = https://www.bart.gov/about/projects/cars/delivery-plan|title = Delivery Plan: BART New Train Cars|publisher = [[Bay Area Rapid Transit]]|accessdate = July 9, 2017}}</ref> During her tenure, BART opened the [[Oakland International Airport (BART station)|Oakland International Airport station]] and [[Warm Springs/South Fremont station]].

One of the factors in deciding to hire Crunican was her connections with federal transit agencies and skill at securing funding, and this would be validated by her subsequent success at getting [[Metropolitan Transportation Commission (San Francisco Bay Area)|Metropolitan Transportation Commission]] funding for the BART train car upgrade,<ref name=crunican-alameda-magazine-profile/> and the passage of Measure RR, giving BART $3.5 billion in infrastructure funds.<ref name=spurvoterguide>{{cite web|url = https://spurvoterguide.org/sf-nov-16/measure-rr-bart-bond/|title = Measure RR: BART Bond|publisher = SPUR Voter Guide|accessdate = June 21, 2017}}</ref><ref name=rr-approval>{{cite web|url = http://sanfrancisco.cbslocal.com/2016/11/09/bart-bond-measure-rr-approved-infrastructure/|title = Voters Approve Measure RR, $3.5 Billion BART Bond|date = November 9, 2016|accessdate = June 21, 2017|publisher = CBS Local}}</ref><ref>{{cite web|url = http://www.sfchronicle.com/opinion/article/Measure-RR-3-5-billion-BART-infrastructure-bond-9969788.php|title = Measure RR: $3.5 billion BART infrastructure bond|last = Kersten|first = David|last2 = Lack|first2 = Wendy|date = October 13, 2016|accessdate = June 21, 2017|publisher = ''[[San Francisco Chronicle]]''}}</ref>

== Personal life ==

Crunican is single and has had two adopted children, from [[China]] and [[Russia]] respectively. She lives in [[Alameda, California]].<ref name=crunican-alameda-magazine-profile/>

== See also ==

* [[B. R. Stokes]], General Manager of BART from 1963 to 1974

== References ==

{{reflist|30em}}
{{Bay Area Rapid Transit}}

[[Category: Bay Area Rapid Transit]]
