The '''Oakland Wye''' is an underground junction in downtown [[Oakland, California|Oakland]] serving the [[Bay Area Rapid Transit]] (BART) system, where trains can switch between (a) the northbound Richmond or Pittsburg/Bay Point lines (first station: [[12th Street Oakland City Center station|12th Street/Oakland City Center]], underground), (b) the westbound San Francisco lines (first station: [[West Oakland station|West Oakland]], elevated) , and (c) the southbound Fremont or Dublin/Pleasanton lines (first station: [[Lake Merritt station|Lake Merritt]], underground).<ref name=bart-scoa/><ref>{{cite web|url = http://www.sfgate.com/opinion/article/2nd-Transbay-Tube-needed-to-help-keep-BART-on-5737004.php|title = 2nd Transbay Tube needed to help keep BART on track|last = Mallett|first = Zakhary|date = September 7, 2014|accessdate = July 31, 2017|publisher = ''[[San Francisco Chronicle]]''}}</ref><ref>{{cite web|url = https://transbayblog.com/2008/07/23/new-feature-bart-track-map/|title = New Feature: BART Track Map|author = Eric|publisher = Transbay Blog|date = July 23, 2008|accessdate = July 31, 2017}}</ref><ref name=ota-atc-rrt>{{cite web|url = https://www.princeton.edu/~ota/disk3/1976/7614/7614.PDF|title = Automatic Train Control in Rapid Rail Transit|date = May 1, 1976|accessdate = June 14, 2017|publisher = [[Office of Technology Assessment]]}}</ref>{{rp|45}} The Oakland Wye has been described as one of the central and most complex part of the BART system, and is a speed bottleneck for the whole system because all BART trains pass through it.<ref name=bart-scoa>{{cite web|url = https://www.bart.gov/sites/default/files/docs/BART%20SCOA%20Final%20Report%20June%202013.pdf|title = BART Sustainable Communities Operations Analysis|date = June 1, 2013|accessdate = July 31, 2017|publisher = [[Bay Area Rapid Transit]]|quote = Station to station running times can identify areas within the system that may be susceptible to delay resulting from either speed / operating restrictions or from infrastructure issues. One of the key locations within the BART system is the Oakland Wye. The Oakland Wye is a multi-level interchange between West Oakland, 12th Street and Lake Merritt stations. BART provided information on the running times between these stations to identify any possible issues with regards route selection, route clearing and secondary delays. The information indicates that actual performance through the Wye is largely consistent with scheduled speeds. As a result, while the Wye does not cause significant delay to operations, it does result in slower overall speeds that could result in longer cycle times. Scheduled run times through this area do include a 10% padding to account for fluctuations in the running times through the Oakland Wye. Running times at other key locations within the BART system are consistent with the scheduled run times; more information can be found in Appendix A2 (a separate document). A previous BART signal system headway and capacity constraint study (Systra, 2012) identified the Oakland Wye is critically important to BART’s current operations and future growth in train service. The underlying signalling is in general well designed, although does have some issues that need to be addressed. The Sequential Occupancy Release System (SORS) overlay, however, was found to have severe and excessive impacts, and in many locations is unnecessarily restrictive. The study found that “SORS could be made to be much less restrictive, and need not be as restrictive as the underlying signal system”. }}</ref><ref>{{cite web|url = http://bartrage.com/node/974|title = crawl speed through the Oakland Wye tunnels....|publisher = BART Rage|date = November 19, 2007|accessdate = July 31, 2017}}</ref>

== References ==

{{reflist|30em}}



