A '''points-based immigration system'''is an immigration system where a noncitizen's eligibility to immigrate is (partly or wholly) determined by whether that noncitizen is above to score above a thershold number of points in a scoring system that might include such factors as education level, wealth, connection with the country, language fluency, existing job offer, or others.<ref name=bbc>{{cite web|url = http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-politics-29594642|title = Immigration points-based systems compared|last = Donald|first = Adam|date = June 1, 2016|accesssdate = November 24, 2017|publisher = [[BBC]]}}</ref><ref name=economist>{{cite web|url = https://www.economist.com/news/international/21701753-countries-invented-points-based-immigration-systems-have-concluded-they-do-not|title = What’s the point? The countries that invented points-based immigration systems have concluded they do not work|date = July 7, 2016|accessdate = November 24, 2017|publisher = ''[[The Economist]]''}}</ref><ref>{{cite web|url = http://workpermit.com/news/points-based-immigration-systems-around-world-20080306|title = Points based immigration systems around the world|date = March 6, 2008|accessdate = November 24, 2017|publisher = workpermit.com}}</ref> Points-based immigration systems are sometimes alsso referred to as merit-based immigration systems,<ref name=fairus>{{cite web|url = https://fairus.org/issue/legal-immigration/merit-based-immigration-systems|title = Merit-Based Immigration Systems|date = March 1, 2017|accessdate = November 24, 2017|publisher = [[Federation for American Immigration Reform]]}}</ref><ref>{{cite web|url = https://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Politics/2017/0302/How-would-merit-based-systems-change-US-immigration|title = How would 'merit-based' systems change US immigration? Points-based immigration systems are in place in most wealthy countries. But if they function smoothly, it's because of bureaucrats.|last = Iconangelo|first = David|date = March 2, 2017|accessdate = November 24, 2017|publisher = ''[[Christian Science Monitor]]''}}</ref> Countries that use points-based immigration systems may have other pathways for potential immigrants (such as immediate family, refugees, etc.), so that meeting the points threshold is not necessary for all immigrants. They may also have additional criteria that points-based immigrants need to satisfy, such as no criminal record or no involvement with terrorist organizations. Some countries that use points-based immigration systems are the [[United Kingdom]] (see [[points-based immigration system (United Kingdom)|main article]]), [[Canada]], [[Australia]], and [[New Zealand]].<ref name=workpermit/><ref name=economist/><ref name=loc>{{cite web|url = https://www.loc.gov/law/help/points-based-immigration/index.php|title = Points-Based Immigration Systems|publisher = [[Library of Congress]]|accessdate = November 24, 2017}}</ref> Canada and Australia are the two countries with the most experience with the points-based system, and are often used as the comparison points when judging whether a country's immigration system is points-based.<ref name=csmonitor/><ref name=economist/><ref name=centreforum/>{{rp|17}}

== Points-based systems by country ==

=== Canada ===

Canada was the first country to introduce a points-based immigration system, doing so in 1967.<ref name=economist/><ref name=bbc/><ref name=centreforum>{{cite web|url = http://www.centreforum.org/assets/pubs/points-based-system.pdf|title = Britain's points based migration system|last = Murray|first = Alasdair|publisher = Centre Forum|date = January 1, 2011|accessdate = November 24, 2017}}</ref>{{rp|19}} The change came as Canada was moving past an immigration system that distinguished based on race and country of origin.<ref name=economist/><ref name=centreforum/> The new system favored youth, education, experience and fluency in English or French, i.e., broad human capital as opposed to a specific job offer or job-specific skills.<ref name=economist/><ref name=centreforum/> The points-based immigration system has been identified as one of the factors in the change in Canada's immigrant distribution from 85% European to 15% European.<ref name=centreforum/>{{rp|20}}

In response to lower and declining labor force participation among people admitted through the points-based system relative to native Canadian workers, two reasons were identified: lack of recognition by Canadian employers of foreign educational degrees, and poor language fluency. As a result, the government changed its points-based system to weigh English and French language fluency more heavily.<ref name=centreforum/> The system was also changed so that any skilled applicant with a job offer scores higher than any applicant without.<ref name=economist/> The application process was also changed to one where people were first invited to express interest rather than apply directly, then given the option of remaining in the pool for a year or two where employers could reach out to them so they could apply with a job offer.<ref name=economist/>

=== Australia ===

In 1972, the Labor Government elected in Austrlia decided migrants would be granted a visa based on personal attributes and ability to contribute to Australian society.<ref name=bbc/> In 1989, Australia formalized a points-based immigration system similar to Canada's<ref name=bbc/><ref name=centreforum/> (''The Economist'' gives a date of 1979 for initial rollout of the policy).<ref name=economist/> Like Canada, Australia switched to the points-based system as it was transitioning out of its history of race-based (Briton-focused, white-only) immigration policy.<ref name=economist/><ref name=centreforum/>{{rp|16}} Australia's experience with the system was similar to Canada's: after seeing that people arriving via the points-based system had less success in the employment market than anticipated, Australia shifted to an application process where people were first invited to express interest rather than apply directly, then given the option of remaining in the pool for a year or two where employers could reach out to them so they could apply with a job offer.<ref name=economist/>

Australia's points-based system was cited as an inspiration and a point of comparison during discussions of immigration policy in the United Kingdom in the context of Brexit.<ref>{{cite web|url = http://theconversation.com/explainer-what-is-australias-points-system-for-immigration-26065|title = Explainer: what is Australia’s ‘points system’ for immigration?|date = June 22, 2016|accessdate = November 24, 2017|publisher = ''The Conversation''}}</ref><ref>{{cite web|url = https://www.ft.com/content/c1b8471c-296b-11e6-8ba3-cdd781d02d89|title = Australia’s points system is more liberal than you think. Such a scheme in the UK would not have the effect that Brexiters expect|last = McTernan|first = John|date = June 3, 2016|accessdate = November 24, 2017}}</ref><ref>{{Cite web|url = https://www.ft.com/content/04c7142e-27e2-11e6-8ba3-cdd781d02d89|title = How Australia’s points-based immigration system works. Strong public support for controlled programme to fill skills shortages|date = June 1, 2016|accessdate = Smith|first = Jamie|accessdate = November 24, 2017}}</ref>

=== United Kingdom ===

{{further|Points-based immigration system (United Kingdom)}}

Between 2008 and 2010, the United Kingdom phased in a points-based immigration system for regulating immigration from outside the [[European Economic Area]].

=== New Zealand ===

New Zealand introduced a points-based system in 1991.<ref name=economist/>

== Lessons from points-based systems ==

=== Points-based systems that incorporate job offers and language fluency lead to better immigrant employment rates than pure skills-based points-based systems ===

Both Canada and Australia began with points-based systems focused more on human capital than on specific job offers, but both found through experience that this resulted in lower immigrant employment rates compared with natives or with immigrants who came as a result of job offers. Both countries modified their points-based systems to take job offers into account.<ref name=economist/><ref name=centreforum/>{{rp|19-20}} These observations led Madeleine Sumption of the Migration Observatory at Oxford University to claim that "pure" point systems "don't work."<ref name=economist/>

=== Points-based systems require frequent tweaking ===

Demetrios Papademetriou of the [[Migration Policy Institute]] argued, based on the frequent tweaking of criteria used by Canada and Australia, that points-based systems require frequent tweaking in order to be successful.<ref name=csmonitor/> Given the slow pace of United States immigration legislation, he argued that this required a greater level of autonomy for the bureaucracy than seen in the United States immigration system, so the implementation of a points-based system would be a challenge for the United States.<ref name=csmonitor/>

== References ==

{{reflist|30em}}
