{{Infobox officeholder
 | name               = Thomas E. Margro
 | office1           = General Manager of the [[Bay Area Rapid Transit]] system
 | term_start1   = September 30, 1996
 | term_end1     = June 29, 2007
 | predecessor1= [[Richard A. White]] (1994 – 1996)
 | successor1    = [[Dorothy Dugger]] (2007 – 2011)
 | office2           = CEO of [[Transportation Corridor Agencies]]
 | term_start2    = 2007
 | term_end2     = 2012
 | successor2    = Neil Peterson
}}

'''Thomas E. "Tom" Margro''' is a mass transportation specialist most famous for being the longest-serving General Manager for the San Francisco [[Bay Area Rapid Transit]] district (serving from 1996 to 2007).<ref name=apta-margro-retires>{{cite web|url = http://www.apta.com/passengertransport/Documents/archive_3857.htm|title = Margro to Retire as BART General Manager|date = April 16, 2007|accessdate = August 20, 2017|publisher = American Public Transportation Association}}</ref><ref name=bart-margro-retires/><ref name=sfgate-margro-retires/> He also served as CEO of the [[Transportation Corridor Agencies]] from 2007 to 2012.<ref name=tca-margro-retires>{{cite web|url = http://www.thecapistranodispatch.com/tca-hires-search-firm-for-new-ceo/|title = TCA Hires Search Firm for New CEO|last = Swanson|first = Justin|date = November 20, 2012|accessdate = August 21, 2017|publisher = The Capistrano Dispatch}}</ref>

== Early life and education ==

Margro is an engineer by training.<ref name=sfgate-margro-retires>{{cite web|url = http://www.sfgate.com/bayarea/article/BAY-AREA-Head-of-BART-plans-to-resign-2603516.php|title = BAY AREA / Head of BART plans to resign|last = Gordon|first = Rachel|date = April 11, 2007|accessdate = August 21, 2017|publisher = ''[[San Francisco Chronicle]]''}}</ref> He graduated [[Syracuse University]] with a Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering, and obtained a Master's Degree from the University of Pennsylvania in Systems Engineering and completed additional post graduate studies in systems engineering.<ref name=bart-margro-retires/>

== Career ==

=== Before BART (1971 – 1990) ===

After graduating college, Margro worked as a rocket scientist for a year, working as a defense contractor on the Minuteman missile guidance system.<ref name=ebt-sunset/>

In 1972, Margro joined the [[Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority]] (SEPTA) in [[Philadelphia]] as the only electrical engineer in a team tasked with maintaining an aging and ill-maintained transit system acquired from a private company.<ref name=ebt-sunset/> He worked at SEPTA for 18 years (till 1990); his roles there included manager of facilities engineering; senior program manager, electrical facilities; chief engineer; and ultimately assistant general manager of engineering and construction.<ref name=bart-margro-retires/><ref name=apta-margro-retires/>

=== First stint at BART (1990 – 1995) ===

Margro worked at BART from 1990 to 1995 as assistant general manager of transit system development. In that position, he was responsible for the BART Extensions Program, including the Pittsburg/Bay Point extension (the [[North Concord/Martinez station]] and [[Pittsburg/Bay Point station]]) and the Dublin/Pleasanton extensions (the [[Castro Valley station]] and [[Dublin/Pleasanton station]]).<ref name=ebt-margro-retires/><ref name=apta-margro-retires/> The stations would open between 1995 and 1997.<ref name=bart-40-years>{{cite web|url = https://www.bart.gov/sites/default/files/40thFactsheet_v1.pdf|title = Forty BART Achievements Over the Years|accessdate = June 14, 2017|publisher = Bay Area Rapid Transit}}</ref>

=== Break from BART (1995 – 1996) ===

Margro worked for a year (between 1995 and 1996) at the [[New Jersey Turnpike Authority]] as Director of Maintenance and Engineering Services/Chief Engineer.<ref name=ebt-sunset/><ref name=bart-margro-retires/><ref name=apta-margro-retires/>

=== Second stint at BART (1996 – 2007) ===

On September 30, 1996, Margro became the General Manager of BART<ref name=apta-margro-retires/> succeeding [[Richard A. White]].<ref name=bart-dugger-becomes-gm>{{cite web|url = http://www.bart.gov/news/articles/2007/newsx20070823|title = BART Board makes history, picks first female to lead agency. Board promotes Dorothy Dugger to General Manager|date = August 23, 2007|accessdate = August 20, 2017|publisher = [[Bay Area Rapid Transit]]}}</ref> According to BART board member [[Tom Radulovich]] who joined the board at about the same time, there was a general feeling at the time that the BART SFO extension (extending BART to the [[San Francisco International Airport station]] and [[Millbrae Intermodal Terminal]]) was lagging behind, and part of the expectation from Margro was that he would complete the extension.<ref name=ebt-margro-retires>{{cite web|url = http://www.eastbaytimes.com/2007/04/10/bart-gm-to-retire/|title = BART general manager to retire|publisher = East Bay Times|date = April 10, 2007|accessdate = August 21, 2017|publisher = East Bay Times}}</ref> Under Margro, BART successfully opened the extension in 2003.<ref name=bart-40-years/><ref name=ebt-margro-retires/>

Margro was also at the helm when Measure AA, a proposal to fund BART's Earthquake Safety Program with $980 million from property taxes, was approved by voters in a referendum,<ref name=bart-40-years/><ref name=bart-eqs>{{cite web|url = http://www.bart.gov/about/projects/eqs|title = Earthquake Safety Program|publisher = Bay Area Rapid Transit|accessdate = June 18, 2017}}</ref><ref name=prop-aa>{{cite web|url = http://www.smartvoter.org/2004/11/02/ca/sf/meas/AA/|title = Proposition AA. BART Earthquake Safety Bond. San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District|date = November 2, 2004|accessdate = June 18, 2017}}</ref><ref name=measure-aa-podcast>{{cite web|url = https://www.bart.gov/news/articles/2016/news20160929|title = Podcast: Bond money pays off with improved earthquake safety|date = September 29, 2016|accessdate = June 18, 2017}}</ref> and he oversaw the initial implementation of the program.<ref name=sfgate-margro-retires/>

On April 10, 2007, BART announced that Margro was retiring, with June 29, 2007 being his last day of service. Margro would be BART's longest serving General Manager.<ref name=bart-margro-retires>{{cite web|url = http://www.bart.gov/news/articles/2007/news20070411|title = BART General Manager announces resignation|date = April 10, 2007|accessdate = August 21, 2017|publisher = [[Bay Area Rapid Transit]]}}</ref> Board members Radulovich and [[Lynette Sweet]] praised his accomplishments, including getting the SFO extension completed, launching the Earthquake Safety Program, and working out a solution with unions representing BART employees to avert financial crisis.<ref name=ebt-margro-retires/><ref name=apta-margro-retires/> Also, it was during Margro's tenure that BART received the [[American Public Transportation Association]]'s Outstanding Public Transportation System honor in 2004.<ref name=apta-margro-retires/><ref name=bart-margro-retires/> The praise was echoed by Dan Richard, a former BART board member.<ref name=ebt-sunset>{{Cite web|url = http://www.eastbaytimes.com/2007/07/02/after-11-years-bart-chief-rides-into-sunset/|title = After 11 years, BART chief rides into sunset|last = Cuff|first = Dennis|date = July 2, 2007|accessdate = August 21, 2017|publisher = ''East Bay Times''}}</ref>

On August 23, 2007, [[Dorothy Dugger]], the former Deputy General Manager, who had been filling the role of interim General Manager, became Margro's successor as General Manager.<ref name=sfgate-dugger-becomes-gm>{{cite web|url = http://www.sfgate.com/bayarea/article/Dorothy-Dugger-named-new-head-of-BART-vote-2508338.php|title = Dorothy Dugger named new head of BART - vote challenged as tainted|date = August 23, 2007|accessdate = August 20, 2017|publisher = ''[[San Francisco Chronicle]]''}}</ref><ref name=mercurynews-dugger-becomes-gm>{{cite web|url = http://www.mercurynews.com/2007/08/23/bart-appoints-first-female-general-manager/|title = Bart appoints first female general manager|publisher = Mercury News|date = August 23, 2007|accessdate = July 27, 2017}}</ref>

=== Transportation Corridor Agencies (2007 – 2012) ===

Margro served as CEO of [[Transportation Corridor Agencies]] (TCA) from 2007 (starting a little after his retirement from BART) to 2012. TCA operates toll roads in [[Orange County, California]].<ref name=tca-margro-retires/> After a nationwide search for a replacement,<ref name=tca-margro-retires/> TCA hired Neil Peterson as the new CEO, with a start date of June 3, 2013.<ref>{{cite web|url = http://www.thetollroads.com/sites/default/files/pdf/investor/FE_FY14_budget_narrative.pdf|title = Resolution No. F2013-06|accessdate = August 21, 2017|publisher = [[Transportation Corridor Agencies]]}}</ref>

== References ==

{{reflist|30em}}

{{Bay Area Rapid Transit}}

[[Category: Bay Area Rapid Transit]]
