'''Yi Ji-ham''', also written '''Lee Ji-ham''' ([[Hangul]]: 이지함, [[Revised Romanization of Korean|RR]]: I Ji-ham, [[McCune–Reischauer]]: Yi Ji-ham, 1517–1578), honorifically called '''Tojeung Yi Ji-ham''', was a [[Korea]]n ([[Joseon Dynasty]]) scholar and seer, famous as the alleged author of ''Tojeong Bigyeol'', a compilation of predictions based on birthdates and trigrams from the Book of Changes.<ref name=kbs>{{cite web|url = http://world.kbs.co.kr/english/archive/program/program_koreanstory.htm?no=25395&current_page=13|title = Lee Ji-ham, a far-seeing sage for the people|publisher = KBS World Radio|accessdate = December 25, 2016}}</ref><ref>{{Cite web|url = http://folkency.nfm.go.kr/en/topic/LegendsofOtherworldlyandRenownedFigures/5632|title = Legends of Otherworldly and Renowned Figures, Encyclopedia of Korean Folk Culture|date = November 30, 2016|accessdate = October 22, 2017}}</ref> He is also known as a rare example of a public official who worked for the welfare of the people.<ref name=ekfl>{{cite book|url = https://books.google.com/books?id=DsR3BgAAQBAJ|title = Encyclopedia of Korean Folk Literature|accessdate = October 22, 2017}}</ref>{{rp|228}}

== Early life ==

Yi Ji-ham was born in [[Boryeong]] in [[Chungcheong Province]] in 1517, during the reign of [[Jungjong of Joseon]]. He was a sixth-generation descendant of Korean writer and poet [[Yi Saek]] who had served the [[Goryeo]] dynasty, the predecessor to the Joseon dynasty.<ref name=kbs/> Ji-ham's father died when he was fourteen. After that, he studied under his elder brother as well as [[Seo Gyeongdeok]], a neo-Confucian naturalistic philosopher, who taught him medicine, mathematics, astronomy, geography, and many other subjects.<ref name=kbs/>

When his 10-foot mud hut remained intact even after a big flood, Yi earned the moniker of Tojeung, meaning "a person who lives in an earthen pavillion."<ref name=kbs/>

== Predictions ==

Yi Ji-ham is claimed to be the author of ''Tojeong Bigyeol'', a compilation of predictions based on birthdates and trigrams from the Book of Changes. However, some scholars claim that the book was written in the late 19th century by somebody using Yi's name.<ref name=kbs/>

Some example predictions that have been taken as evidence of his predictive power were:

* Prediction of his father-in-law's death from a massacre of scholars<ref name=kbs/>
* Prediction of [[Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–98)|Japan's 1592 invasion of Korea]]<ref name=kbs/><ref name=kbs/><ref name=ekfl/>

While some narratives of his predictive ability show him as using his predictive abilities to escape danger and plan better, others portray him as accepting human fate.<ref name=ekfl/>

== Views ==

Yi Ji-ham believed in the importance of building simple skills that would allow people to produce goods (such as making straw ropes and catching fish). He also toured the country to educate farmers on improving agricultural productivity. He also believed in the value of markets and trade, both within the country and overseas trade, to improve people's standard of living, an uncommon view at a time when merchants were generally frowned upon. This is attributed to his teacher [[Seo Gyeongdeok]], who held similar views and had many merchants in his following.<ref name=kbs/>

== Political career ==

Yi Ji-ham entered politics in his 50s.<ref name=kbs/> He served as magistrate of [[Pocheon]] and [[Asan]], and was praised by the people as an exemplary public official for maintaining simple ways and caring about the people. In Joseon-era Korea, his name would often be cited as an exemplar of the ideal for a public official, a ''mongmingwan'' ([[Hangul]]: 목민관, true shepherd of people).<ref name=ekfl/><ref name=kbs/>

While in office, he established an agency for vagrants, which trained the elderly and sick in simple tasks that could fetch some money in the market, such as making straw ropes (for the elderly) and catching fish (for the young). Rather than just a charity organization, the agency was a job training and rehabilitation center, a novel concept for that time and place.<ref name=kbs/>

== Death ==

Yi Ji-ham died three months into his career as the magistrate of Asan.<ref name=kbs/> One account of his death is that a clerk, who was offended when Yi refused to share a gold nugget with him, replaced his chestnut antidote with willow bark, causing Yi to die due to the centipede juice he drank.<ref name=ekfl/>

Upon his death, people of Asan cried on the streets.<ref name=kbs/>

== Legacy ==

Yi Ji-ham's legacy was as an exemplar of what a public official, a ''mongmingwan'' ([[Hangul]]: 목민관, true shepherd of people) could be, in terms of caring for the people and pushing through practical reforms and improvements.<ref name=ekfl/> His legend gained currency at a time when there was increasing resistance in Josen Korea again neo-Confucianism and a rise of ''[[Silhak]]'' (practical learning).<ref name=ekfl/> His alleged powers of foresight gained currency against a backdrop of increased interest in divination.<ref name=ekfl/>

== In fiction ==

* Portrayed by [[Joo Jin-mo (actor, born 1958)|Joo Jin-mo]] in ''[[Flowers of the Prison]]'' (MBC, 2016)

== References ==

{{reflist|30em}}

