# GiveWell versus the Gates Foundation: fundamental differences

GiveWell, through its role as a recommender of top charities, and the
Gates Foundation, through its direct allocation of money, are major
movers of capital in global health and development. A large share of
GiveWell's money moved is through Open Philanthropy's recommendations
to Good Ventures, which is funded by the wealth of billionaires
Facebook co-founder Dustin Moskovitz. The Gates Foundation mainly
distributes the wealth of billionaires Bill Gates and Warren Buffett.

Both GiveWell and the Gates Foundation are headed by very smart,
dedicated people and both place a lot of importance on evidence.

Given all these, we might expect that GiveWell and the Gates
Foundation follow approximately similar strategies within the field of
global health and development. But in fact their strategies are very
different, and a lot of this boils down to their underlying philosophy
as well as their very different origins. This post goes into detail on
how these philosophies differ.

I don't have a good sense for which one is better (to the extent that
question even makes sense). GiveWell has done a better job
communicating its position to individual donors, and I think it's
likely that the GiveWell strategy was definitely a good fit for their
initial purpose (before they had the support of a billionaire). I'm
less sure now, and I do wonder if the GiveWell strategy is a relic of
a past time.

It's also interesting to think about the GiveWell approach because
many aspects of this approach also pervade other areas prioritized by
effective altruism (i.e., cause areas other than global health and
development).

## Three key differences between GiveWell and the Gates Foundation

#### GiveWell adopts a greedy algorithm, the Gates Foundation acts like a catalyst/turbocharger across the entire spectrum

GiveWell [started
off](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/KngH3kABkhZet8qML/evaluating-givewell-as-a-startup-idea-based-on-paul-graham-s)
as a way for individual small donors to figure out the best uses of
their money at the margin; they just needed to figure out how the next
few million dollars could be best spent. This partly informed the
approach of thinking at the margin, looking at room for more funding,
and identifying proven, cost-effective, scalable interventions.

GiveWell now has influence over the allocation of substantially larger
sums of money, but it essentially still adopts a very similar
approach: it allocates funds to the best use at the margin, then once
that use gest fully funded, it picks the next best use at the margin,
and so on. This general approach is similar to the concept of [greedy
algorithm in computer
science](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greedy_algorithm): keep trying
to make the locally greediest choice (here, greed is not personal
greed, but greed to do the most good with the money being moved).

The general wisdom about greedy algorithms in the computer science
world is that for many classes of problems, they don't find optimal
solutions, but they find solutions that are not too bad in a
relatively simple way. Combinatorics and computer science have studied
in depth the conditions under which greedy algorithms give optimal
solutions and the conditions under which they give solutions that are
decent but not optimal. I won't go into the specifics because I don't
think they directly translate, but they paint a picture of the
conceptual possibilities.

In the case of GiveWell's allocation of money, the greedy algorithm
would miss situations where you need big combined expenditures, above
the levels at which GiveWell is thinking marginally. For instance,
let's say an investment of $1 billion is needed for a vaccine that
would permanently eradicate malaria, but subsets of that amount don't
get us a partial . If GiveWell is thinking of allocations of
incremental few millions, then a $1 billion donation would be out of
the question, even if that did end up being more cost-effective than
malaria preventions they're funding.

The pattern created by GiveWell's greedy algorithm is one where
GiveWell skims the top of cost-effectiveness: it picks a few highly
cost-effective things to fund, gives moderate but not super-huge
amounts to them (because most of them start running out of ability to
use money after GiveWell directs tens of millions to them).

The Gates Foundation doesn't seem to take this sort of greedy
approach; they tend to be open to making larger grants (up to a few
hundred million) for big things e.g., malaria vaccine.

### GiveWell doesn't care about diseases as cause areas per se, but about the final effects on humans

GiveWell [doesn't really
care](https://blog.givewell.org/2007/07/07/charity-vs-philanthropy/)
about attacking malaria (or whatever disease) per se; they don't have
a specific commitment to achieve any milestones with respect to
malaria. Rather, they're just looking for the best bang for the buck
across all diseases.

To a first approximation, GiveWell doesn't care about malaria as a
whole, just about the additive (not the multiplicative) difference
it's making to people getting malaria.

For this reason, GiveWell can vary widely year-over-year in the amount
of money it directs to different disease. And there are many diseases
it may have donated no money for at all. So it can have a more lopsided portfolio.

The Gates Foundation, on the other hand, tends to cover a wide range
of diseases, donating a little bit in each (since the Gates Foundation
donates a lot more, the absolute amount it donates per area is
comparable to the amount GiveWell moves for its highest-moved areas).

### GiveWell is okay just scaling up; Gates Foundation is more into innovation and tries to get other entities to help with the scale-up

https://blog.givewell.org/2007/11/20/heres-to-fear-of-failure/

## Can we think of Gates Foundation as a seed investor, and GiveWell as a strategic late-stage investor?
