# How does the collapse of the FTX Future Fund change the picture for individual donors?

In a [post in
October](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/u3D8xM5XNgerHpAtc/my-donation-budget-and-fallback-donation-allocation),
I outlined my thoughts at the time regarding where I'll make my
end-of-year donation. In there, I noted that while I think that many
cause areas that fall under "longtermism" are likely very *important*,
the significant funding being directed at them from FTX Future Fund
and Survival and Flourishing Fund makes these causes
*non-neglected*. That was one of the reasons I was leaning toward
making my end-of-year donation to the Animal Welfare Fund instead of
the Long-Term Future Fund.

This was before the November 2022 collapse of FTX and of the FTX
Future Fund. I'm wondering how to think about the effect of the
collapse of the FTX Future Fund on the funding available for
"longtermist" projects in general, and how this should affect
individual donors such as myself.

In particular, some of the things I've been wondering are:

* How effectively does the Long-Term Future Fund (the main donation
  option for individual donors) funge with FTX Future Fund in terms of
  the projects and organizations funded? How much does the collapse of
  the FTX Future Fund increase the room for more funding for the
  Long-Term Future Fund?

* Are there specific other donees that have become particularly
  relevant for individual donors in light of the collapse of the FTX
  Future Fund? An example (that I don't know much about) is the
  [Nonlinear Emergency
  Fund](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/L4S2NCysoJxgCBuB6/announcing-nonlinear-emergency-funding)
  intended to help FTX grantees, that seemed to indicate that they
  have room for more funding.

* Does the continually developing nature of the FTX collapse situation
  make it more important to hold funds for now and donate them a
  little later once the ramifications are clearer? Or is it the
  opposite, namely, that there is a more urgent need for funds and
  therefore it's more important to donate more now?

* Are there other related questions and considerations that I'm
  missing?

I don't know how the answers to the above questions will affect my
donation decision (it's possible that my donation decision will
ultimately be influenced by personal factors specific to me). I hope
that any answers or comments generated by this post will be helpful
not just to me but to other potential donors wondering how the FTX
collapse situation affects them.
