# Levels of donation

Via a [YouTube video on the
subject](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B8d4uqQjk6o), I came across a
[Reddit post on levels of
wealth](https://www.reddit.com/r/ifiwonthelottery/comments/9qv4e1/post_on_the_different_levels_of_wealth_that_i/). The
post separates out different levels of wealth and the qualitative
differences between them, with the four levels being $10-30 million,
$30-100 million, $100 million-$1 billion, and $1 billion+.

As with all such analyses, the threshold selection is somewhat
arbitrary, and a lot of nuance is missed, but I still find the
exercise interesting.

I thought it would be interesting to do a somewhat similar exercise
for levels of donation; this seemed like a good prompt in response to
which I could express several thoughts that have been floating around
in my mind.

This post looks at various levels of donation as well as the ways one
could level up (if deemed desirable).

## The levels of donation

### Tier 1: retail donor (< $1,000)

Lower limit for tier 1: retail donor: $0

Upper limit for tier 1: retail donor: $500 to $1,000

* **Split between donees?** (no): The [one-charity
  argument](https://www.jefftk.com/p/why-it-makes-sense-to-pick-one-charity)
  is pretty much definitely true here; it's very hard to imagine a
  case where the marginal value functions of two donees cross
  within this small an amount of donation.

* **Investigate?** (no): It probably doesn't make sense to spend
  extensive resources investigating by yourself or hiring others to
  investigate. You should either donate directly to the best endpoint
  donee, or give money to a reallocator (such as the EA Funds) that
  is sufficiently value-aligned with you. It may not even make sense
  to write extensively about your decision.

* **Engage donee?** (no): It probably doesn't make sense to ask a bunch
  of questions of the donee or expect any kind of personalized
  response; it's best to rely on information you already have as a
  donor.

* **Optimize for transaction costs?** (no): You should probably just
  use whatever donation method the donee recommends, rather than
  reaching out to the donee to figure out the best method for your
  particular case (for instance, if they suggest using PayPal, use
  PayPal, even if you know it has network fees that you'd rather not
  spend).

* **Optimize for taxes?** (no): Optimizing donation timing and other
  donation mechanics for tax considerations probably doesn't make
  sense at this level.

### Tier 2 (four-digit donors)

Lower limit for tier 2: $500 to $1,000

Upper limit for tier 2: $5,000 to $10,000

* **Split between donees?** (conceivable but unlikely): It's
  conceivable (though unlikely) that the one-charity argument starts
  breaking down here, if the expected *best* use of your funds also
  has sharply diminishing marginal value (e.g., helping an organization
  get off the ground, or close a small funding gap). So you might find
  yourself splitting your donation.

* **Investigate?** (yes, a few hours): If you don't have any obvious
  endpoint donee or reallocator with whom you are closely
  value-aligned *a priori*, it may make sense to spend a few hours
  investigating the options. It may also make sense to document your
  thinking.

* **Engage donee?** (maybe, hope for responsiveness but not proactive
  effort for donee): It may make sense to ask questions of potential
  donees to get information beyond what you already know, especially
  if there isn't a lot of publicly available information. However, you
  should not expect donees to drop everything to appease you or go
  through application processes.

* **Optimize for transaction costs?** (yes): You should coordinate
  with the donee on the mechanics of the money transfer to minimize
  transaction costs, to the extent that the donee has options
  available.

* **Optimize for taxes?** (yes; start thinking about it): Optimizing
  donation timing and other donation mechanics for tax considerations
  may start making sense. For instance, you may decide to defer
  donation by a month or two so that it falls in the next tax
  year. However, this is most likely going to be a minor
  consideration compared to other considerations.

### Tier 3 (five-digit donors)

Lower limit for tier 3: $5,000 to $10,000

Upper limit for tier 3: $50,000 to $100,000

* **Split between donees?** (plausible): There's a high enough
  chance that marginal value functions change enough over the course
  of your donation that you should think about marginal value
  functions and not just assume the one-charity argument. If you don't
  want to be bothered by such considerations, donating to large
  organizations (or reallocators) is probably the way to go.

* **Investigate?** (yes, and maybe engage others to investigate too):
  It may make sense to not only spend your time but seek the time of
  others -- potentially even pay others -- to investigate options and
  find the most value-aligned option. Whether you do so depends on how
  good you think the existing options (both endpoint donees and
  reallocators) are. It may even make sense to participate in
  something like the
  [S-process](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jWivz6KidkI) with other
  funders and recommenders, or add one's own funds to an existing
  S-process (the advantage of the S-process over donating to EA Funds
  is that you can input your own weights on different recommenders, so
  it may be better if you are somewhat but not fully aligned with the
  individual recommenders).

* **Engage donee?** (yes, seek more proactive response): At this
  amount of money, if you're considering giving all or a large chunk
  of it to a specific donee, it makes sense to engage the donee in
  depth, to understand better how they expect to use the money, how
  it'll interact with the rest of their fundraising plans, etc. This
  gives a clearer picture of the marginal value function. The amount
  of money may even be enough for you or the donee to think of other
  uses for the money beyond what the donee had in mind. But it's still
  not enough money for you to expect the donee to radically change
  direction to acquire the money.

* **Optimize for transaction costs?** (yes): At this level, it may
  make sense to do more than just figure out the best of the
  *existing* money transfer options; it may even be worth setting up a
  new way to transfer money to reduce the transaction costs.

* **Optimize for taxes?** (yes, possibly even encourage the donee to
  get a relevant tax-exempt status): At this scale, the tax savings
  from being able to deduct the donation from taxes may be high enough
  to cover the costs for the donee to apply for tax-exempt status, if
  it doesn't have one already but is otherwise eligible for one.

### Tier 4 (six-digit donors)

Lower limit for tier 4: $50,000 to $100,000

Upper limit for tier 4: $500,000 to $1,000,000

* **Split between donees?** (likely): At this point, unless you
  happen to think the most scalable things are also the most
  high-value, it's quite likely you'll either want to split your
  donation between donees or donate to a reallocator such as the EA
  Funds that will effectively use the extra money to donate to more
  endpoint donees.

* **Investigate?** (yes, at this point it becomes a matter of due
  diligence): At this level of money, even if you have the impression
  that a particular endpoint donee or reallocator is value-aligned,
  you should investigate in order to seek confirmation of this. Even
  slight misalignments in value would tilt the scales toward running
  something like a
  [S-process]((https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jWivz6KidkI).

* **Engage donees?** (yes, you can even set up an application form and
  conduct multiple rounds of grantmaking): At this point, you can go
  to donees or ask donees to come to you. You can write up your own
  request for proposals and expect existing or even potential new
  donees to read it and apply based on what you're looking for. You
  can reach out to people and suggest they start up organizations that
  you would like to see.

* **Optimize for transaction costs?** (yes): Not much changes from the
    previous tier for this.

* **Optimize for taxes?** (yes): At this scale, it makes sense to be
  thinking hard about the right financial instruments to use to
  minimize tax obligations over the long term. You may even pay people
  to figure this out and set up the right systems.

### Tier 5 (seven-digit donors)

Lower limit for tier 5: $500,000 to $1,000,000

Upper limit for tier 5: $5,000,000 to $10,000,000

At this level, a bunch of new considerations start popping up.

* **Split over time, and use initial grantmaking to "learn"**: Rather
  than donating the entire amount upfront, split over time, and use
  initial grantmaking to learn more about the space.

* **Build relationships with donees and understand their expectations
  of renewed funding**: When you make grants to donees, talk to them
  about whether they would need followup grants; communicate clearly
  with donees if you don't expect to make followup grants. Use [exit
  grants](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exit_grant) when stopping
  support to donees.

* **Consider quitting your job or hiring somebody part-time /
  full-time to manage the ongoing grantmaking work**: This is
  particularly relevant if you're *not* deferring your donation choice
  to a known reallocator.

### Tier 6 (eight-digit or more)

Lower limit for tier 6: $5,000,000 to $10,000,000

Upper limit for tier 6: no limit!

A bunch of new considerations start emerging here.

You become an entity to be feared in the space. Even people whom you
aren't donating to are now stakeholders in the way your money is
affecting the ecosystem. At this point, it starts becoming important
to communicate your philosophy and engage with relevant
communities. You get in the hot seat to some extent and start having
to justify that you aren't distorting the space.

This is also the level at which you can actually hire a staff
full-time to manage the grantmaking operations, if you so choose. Or
you can significantly grow the budget of a reallocator which might
allow that reallocator to invest more resources in staff (you may want
to explicitly fund the reallocator's operating expenses and
capacity-building work rather than earmark your funds to use for
endpoint donees).

## Leveling up

If you happen to believe that the most scalable interventions are also
the most high-value, and that these have already been figured out,
leveling up doesn't matter that much *per se* -- your giving won't
change qualitatively. For instance, if you think that GiveDirectly is
the best use of the next trillion dollars of your money, it doesn't
matter too much what level you are at -- you'll keep donating to
GiveDirectly.

However, if you think the most high-value interventions are either not
that scalable or are still in the process of being figured out or
don't exist yet, leveling up changes the qualitative picture in terms
of what you can accomplish with your money.

Since the different tiers I've identified are separated by factors of
~10, leveling up is not easy. Let's talk about the three ways of
leveling up:

* Increasing your rate of allocating money for donation
  * Increasing your income
  * Reducing your expenses
  * Increasing the proportion of your savings that you allocate for donation
* Accumulating over time
* Pooling with like-minded people
* Donor lotteries

### Increasing your income

This is probably the most high-upside way of leveling up. For
instance, Sam Bankman-Fried seriously leveled up when he got into the
crypto space and started making tens of millions.

It's worth noting, though, that increasing income while staying within
the same kind of job won't usually lead to a leveling up. For
instance, getting a 10% raise a the job, or taking a competing job
offer that pays 30% more, won't get you to level up. If you are
interested in seriously leveling up, you need to find some really
high-upside opportunities (and most of these are also high-risk, so
you need to see asymmetric benefits in leveling up to be really
excited about these opportunities).

Realistically, I'd say that outside of stumbling upon a successful
startup or rising in the ranks in finance, you can probably go up to
tier 3 (upper limit of $100,000) and maybe up to tier 4 (upper limit
of $1 million), but not further.

### Reducing your expenses

This is even less effective than increasing your income, because the
effect of reducing your expenses is bounded; you can donate at most
100% of your income! Moreover, once your income crosses a certain
threshold, the effect of reducing expenses is even smaller.

The cases where reducing your expenses really allows you to level up
are probably the cases where you're at tier 1 (retail donor) and with
slight reduction of expenses you can get to tier 2 (up to $10,000). It
seems unlikely that a move from tier 2 to tier 3 could be facilitated
primarily by reducing expenses.

### Increasing the proportion of your savings that you allocate for donation

As with reducing your expenses, the upside here is limited: you can
allocate at most 100% of your savings to donation (there's some
pre-tax/post-tax nuance but the basic point stands). How much upside
you have here depends on how much of your saving you're currently
allocating for donation. My rough sense is that this can likely get
you up from tier 1 to tier 2, and in some cases up from tier 2 to tier
3, but rarely further. But if you're already a billionaire and just
haven't thought about donation much, then you have more room to grow.

### Accumulating over time

Instead of donating money every year, you could accumulate the money so
it grows more. You could also reinvest it and have it grow even faster
(something something miracle of compound interest).

However, given that the levels are separated by a factor of ten, we're
talking about accumulating over 5-10 years in order to level up one
level, and 25-100 years in order to level up two levels (even
accounting for compound interest). While this might be worthwhile in
some cases, it also needs to be balanced against haste considerations
and the urgency of various issues. All in all this does not seem like
an efficient way to level up.

### Pooling with like-minded people

The simplest example of pooling is within a marriage: you and your
spouse share similar values, and also share many of the rest of your
financial decisions, so it makes sense to pool together your
donations. If your earnings are in the same ballpark, you level up by
a factor of 2.

You may also pool with other like-minded people you work with; for
instance, Sam Bankman-Fried and many of the people he worked with at
FTX and Alameda pooled together their resources to fund various
FTX-related philanthropy.

You can also pool with other like-minded people you are not in a
personal or work relationship with.

Pooling can deliver a multiplier big enough to level up, if the pool
is big enough! For instance, if you find 9 other like-minded people
with similar amounts of money, you can pool and go up one level.

### Donor lotteries

[Donor
lotteries](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/eSoqa8DEhTqyYEfsM/claim-explainer-donor-lotteries-and-returns-to-scale)
are another way to level up. Donor lotteries is a bit like pooling
with like-minded people, with one key difference: there can be a case
for donor lotteries even if the other people *aren't* like-minded! The
linked explainer goes over this in more detail.

## Conclusion

This post is an attempt to articulate systematically the qualitative
changes as one goes up in levels of donation, inspired by past
discussions of levels of wealth. The post is both descriptive
(especially within the effective altruist penumbra) and prescriptive
for the broader world of donation (in the sense that it describes what
should happen but doesn't always happen in that broader world). One
key crux around the extent to which one believes levels matter, is the
extent to which you believe that the most scalable, shovel-ready
interventions are also the most high-value; if you believes that, then
leveling up has limited qualitative impact. On the other hand, if you
believe that there is a lot of high-value untapped potential that is
not currently scalable or shovel-ready, *and* that you would be able
to identify at least some of this potential (directly or by
delegating), then leveling up delivers super-linear expected returns.
