# Longtermist funding is expected to increase a lot in the coming years

While making my
[updates](https://github.com/vipulnaik/donations/commits) to the
[donations list website](https://donations.vipulnaik.com/), I noticed
some things that suggest that funding directed in a broadly
longtermist direction will increase a lot in the next few years. The
potential increase suggests that talent and capacity constraints will
be more critical than funding constraints in the next few years. I'm
sure elites/insiders in the fund allocation space have already thought
about it, but I haven't seen much public discussion around these
points.

## Expected funding increases

### Jaan Tallinn's philanthropy pledge

On his [philanthropy page](https://jaan.online/philanthropy/), Jaan
Tallinn pledges, for each of the five years from 2020 to 2024, to
donate, in "endpoint grants" (i.e., grants that have reached their
endpoint rather than being yet to be regranted), at *least* the larger
of $2 million and 20,000 times the minimum price of Ethereum (ETH) in
the year.

Here's a very crude table with final-ish 2020 data, tentative 2021
data (based on ETH price charts and grants announced via the Survival
and Flourishing Fund, and keeping in mind that some of the SFF grants
are not endpoint grants), and some crude estimates for 2022.

Year | Minimum USD price of ETH in the year | Minimum amount to donate (USD) | Estimate of amount actually donated (USD)
-- | -- | -- |--
2020 | 110.30 | 2,206,000 | 4,270,000
2021 | 730.99 | 14,619,800 | 15,000,000, to 20,000,000
2022 | est. 2,000 - 4,000 | est. 40,000,000 to 80,000,000 | ??

A quick note on 2022. Cryptocurrency prices can fluctuate quite a bit,
so we really don't know what will happen with Ethereum
prices. However, ETH prices have been above 2,000 USD for most of the
time since April, and above 4,000 USD for a large part of the time
since October. It seems reasonably likely that ETH prices will
continue to stay above 2,000 USD for all of 2022.

Moreover, the pledge in terms of the minimum price in the year is
likely just a floor; it's more likely that Tallinn will care more
about the prices of ETH around the times he is making grants, which
are more spread out over the year. So even if there's some flash crash
in ETH prices, if most of the year ETH prices stay high enough it's
likely he'll donate a lot.

Looking at these estimates, then, we see that *significant* amounts of
money will probably have to be disbursed as *endpoint* grants in 2022,
more than double what we saw in 2021.

### FTX Foundation

The [FTX Foundation](https://ftx.com/intl/foundation) has already been
making some donations, but the donations so far seem to be mostly
driven by user donation matching of user choices, rather than
foundation-level allocation. However, a few things are suggestive that
the FTX Foundation will start becoming a bigger player and will focus
on longtermist areas:

* Scale of money: The foundation's page says that the total amount
  earmarked for charity is over $16 billion. Much of this is the
  wealth of Sam Bankman-Friend and his co-founders, who are probably
  somewhat like-minded.

* Focus on longtermism: In a [fireside
  chat](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=--tV8U3BbJk), Sam
  Bankman-Fried said that it's very hard to refute the math that shows
  that the long-term matters a lot just as a result of sheer
  numbers. Also, the hiring of Nick Beckstead as foundation CEO
  ([friends-restricted Facebook
  post](https://www.facebook.com/nbeckstead/posts/10118866028010570))
  suggests a longtermist focus, considering that Beckstead's
  [research](https://www.nickbeckstead.com/research) has been on the
  importance of shaping the long-term future, and the [donations he
  has
  influenced](https://donations.vipulnaik.com/influencer.php?influencer=Nick+Beckstead)
  have been in longtermist areas.

* Plans to accelerate giving: The hiring of Nick Beckstead as FTX CEO
  suggests that FTX Foundation does plan to scale up and accelerate
  its giving.

We don't know how long it will take to meaningfully scale up giving;
it's possible that there won't be much happening in 2022, as FTX
Foundation works on its initial capacity-building.

### Other donors

MIRI received a $15.6 million donation; it's not clear if it'll
receive more.