At the end of 2018 (specifically, on December 22, 2018), I donated
$3,000 USD with the following allocation:

* $2,000 to GiveWell for discretionary regranting to top charities, by [check](https://www.givewell.org/about/donate/check)
* $500 to the [$500,000 EA Donor Lottery](https://app.effectivealtruism.org/lotteries/63715163508813), on behalf of Issa Rice. This means that, in the 0.1%-probability case that I win the lottery, he will choose the allocation of the funds
* $500 to the [Machine Intelligence Research Institute](https://intelligence.org/donate/), on behalf of Issa Rice

This is my first set of normal charity donations since 2012, when I
donated $500 to GiveDirectly. In this post, I describe:

* My reason for donating now, rather than earlier or later: Till now,
  I was first building up a saving buffer and then funding contract
  work heavily. With recent reduction in contract work spending and
  increase in income, I am better positioned to donate.

* My reason for choosing this amount to donate: It's the minimum
  amount that is substantive yet unlikely to materially affect me; I
  would donate more if I saw more compelling opportunities, and want
  to keep a reserve that will allow me to donate more in the future

* The selection of recipients: For the money directly allocated by me,
  GiveWell top charities won as a default baseline because the
  alternatives were not yet compelling enough.
  
### My reason for donating now rather than earlier

After my last donation of $500 to GiveDirectly on December 24, 2012,
my personal focus shifted toward building a good saving buffer and
acquiring personal financial stability. For these reasons, I deferred
donating, with the expectation that I might potentially donate larger
amounts later, as I had done prior to 2012. You can see some related
thoughts from me in a [post to the Effective Altruists Facebook group
in March
2014](https://www.facebook.com/groups/effective.altruists/permalink/655328167856877/).

By 2015, I had a decent saving rate and I was quite interested in
exploring philanthropic opportunities, but felt that, rather than
directly allocate money to charity, I should invest more in getting a
deeper understanding of various domains that might be relevant. This
was part of the motivation for me spending a fair amount of money
financing [contract work](https://contractwork.vipulnaik.com/), mostly
by Issa Rice and Sebastian Sanchez, which picked up in 2016 and has
been proceeding at a fairly steady pace since then. The total money
I've paid for contract work since I started on it has been around
$115,000. This is a significant amount of money that has taken
precedence over donating money to charity.

At this point, while taking stock of my finances, I realized a few things:

* The amount of money I'm paying per month for contract work has
  reduced, partly because Issa Rice (one of the two main people
  working for me) is now working fewer hours for me and spending more
  time [learning background math for AI safety
  research](https://issarice.wordpress.com/). This dovetails well with
  the fact that some of the projects he was working on with me have
  transitioned to maintenance mode where they don't need many active
  hours from him.

* My income has increased somewhat, and I also realized some windfall
  gains from cryptocurrency price increases in 2017, which have put me
  in a somewhat better shape financially.

Together, these factors mean that I have a little more money available
to donate to charity now than I did till recently.

### My reason for choosing this amount to donate

My current financial situation is such that I could donate a
reasonably large amount if I felt there was a compelling opportunity
that I was uniquely suited to fund. Indeed, some of the contract work
I've funded has fit that bill. Outside of the contract work I've
directly funded, however, I have not yet found such opportunities. I
have found a fair number of opportunities that meet some of the
attributes, but most of them tend to get funded through other means,
which is good for them and for me.

In the absence of compelling opportunities to fund, my default is to
donate some minimum amount. Some reasons to keep my current donation
to a minimum amount:

* The maintenance of funds that can cater to the possibility of
  discovering more compelling opportunities later, which could involve
  scaling up contract work (if it's a project I can fund or direct) or
  donating to another person, project, or organization.

* The potential benefits of a larger financial buffer to support
  transitions to "direct work" careers in the future (though I don't
  anticipate immediately making such a transition).

* The potential personal benefits of a larger financial buffer,
  outside of altruistic reasons.

To figure out the amount to donate, I used a few heuristics:

* It's been 6 years since the last standard charity donation, and I
  feel like $500/year is a reasonable "minimum" -- it is substantive
  enough but still small enough that it does not foreclose
  opportunities for me. Multiplying $500 by 6 gives $3,000.

* It also roughly works out to about 1% of my after-tax income for the
  6 years, which is another way of seeing that it is nontrivial but
  still not enough to meaningfully impact me.

* The total amount that's being donated is big enough that the
  financial transaction overhead doesn't eat too much into it. This is
  another advantage of bunching across years.

### The selection of recipients

For each of the years 2017 and 2018, I had given Issa the option of
assigning $500 of my money to charitable causes of his choosing (with
no strict requirement that these be recognized as charities). In 2017,
Issa deferred the use of the money, so he had $1,000 to allocate.

Issa ultimately decided to allocate 50% of the $1,000 (i.e., $500) to
the [$500,000 EA Donor
Lottery](https://app.effectivealtruism.org/lotteries/63715163508813),
and another 50% to the Machine Intelligence Research Institute
(MIRI). For the donor lottery, the understanding was that although the
entry was under my name, Issa would make the decision as to how to
allocate the winnings in the (0.1% probability) event that I win the
lottery.

Since my overall giving budget was $3,000, and $1,000 was to be
determined by Issa, that left $2,000 to allocate. When thinking about
this allocation, I considered a few different options.

* GiveWell top charities
* Effective Altruism Funds
* Interesting "rising stars"

#### GiveWell top charities

I've been observing GiveWell for quite some time. For a while, I've
found their research quite good, but until a few years ago, I still
had significant uncertainty around how well their top charities and
their vetting process would stand up to the test of time. In the last
few years, I've seen that the top charities seem to stand up quite
well, the research process has continued to improve, and the funding
cycle has a clear rhythm I can understand. I believe the problems that
are being addressed by GiveWell top charities are large enough that
there are few risks of room for more funding disappearing. I also
think GiveWell's approach to [discretionary
regranting](https://donations.vipulnaik.com/donor.php?donor=GiveWell+discretionary+regranting)
is a good one.

Donating money to GiveWell for reallocation to top charities seems
like a reasonable baseline choice. The question for me was whether
there are better choices out there.

#### Effective Altruism Funds

I've been following the Effective Altruism Funds for a while, and in
particular I've been keeping track of the [grants they've been
making](https://donations.vipulnaik.com/donor.php?donor=Effective+Altruism+Funds). I
am impressed with what I've seen so far, particularly from the Animal
Welfare Fund, and I think the Meta Fund and the Long-Term Future Fund
have also made some interesting grants.

However, I have a lot of uncertainty around how these funds will
continue to operate over the years, and what sort of funding landscape
they will be operating in. It could be the case that the money pouring
into the funds significantly exceeds the amount of good places they
can donate to. It could also be the case that we discover over the
next year that the grants that seem good now turn out to be not so
good, or even actively bad. Another source of uncertainty to me is how
EA Funds will play with other financing initiatives like EA Grants: it
could be the case that as EA Grants scales up, there are fewer of
these interesting projects for EA Funds to fund.

I ultimately decided to watch the EA Funds (as well as the general
landscape in which they operate) for a little longer before making a
decision to donate to them.

#### Interesting "rising stars"

Some organizations start becoming donation targets in the effective
altruism community after word of mouth from a few people. These could
be:

* Organizations that have been around for a while and have no other
  direct connection to the movement, but that get picked up by a few
  people in the community. Examples:
  [Tostan](https://donations.vipulnaik.com/donee.php?donee=Tostan) in
  2016,
  [StrongMinds](https://donations.vipulnaik.com/donee.php?donee=StrongMinds)
  (2016 to present), [No Means No
  Worldwide](https://donations.vipulnaik.com/donee.php?donee=No+Means+No+Worldwide). I
  thought a bit about donating in this space, but decided that these
  organizations have plenty of funding sources, and I also wasn't
  convinced of the thoroughness of the evaluation of them.

* Organizations that started out from within the effective altruism
  community, and are still in a startup stage where they
  have enough funding to survive but maybe not enough to grow
  fast. Potential examples: [AI
  Impacts](https://donations.vipulnaik.com/donee.php?donee=AI+Impacts),
  [Alliance to Feed the Earth in
  Disasters](https://donations.vipulnaik.com/donee.php?donee=Alliance+to+Feed+the+Earth+in+Disasters),
  [LessWrong
  2.0](https://donations.vipulnaik.com/donee.php?donee=LessWrong+2.0). While
  I might have been interested in funding specific organizations in
  this reference class, none of the ones I know fit the bill for me; I
  believe the funding flowing to these organizations is adequate and
  the constraints hampering their growth are not primarily those of
  funding. However, this is just with my current state of knowledge;
  I'm keeping an eye on a lot of these and might change my mind about
  specific ones.

* Fledgling, not-quite-started organizations. Their very survival is
  unclear. At present, I don't have a clear idea of which of them
  might be worth funding; the data I've seen didn't point to a clear
  example of something that would be a compelling use of funds.

As you can see from the numerous links I've included above, I have
(with help from Issa Rice) been collating a lot of donation
information and discussion documents on the [donations list
website](https://donations.vipulnaik.com/), and this has helped me get
a sense of the landscape. I hope to continue to learn more and might
find good opportunities.

### Summary

The upshot is that GiveWell top charities "won" as the default
baseline, and that's where I ended up donating. But I also ended up
making this donation smaller, opening the possibility for larger
donations later.

I hope to continue working on projects like the [Donations list
website](https://donations.vipulnaik.com/) on my personal time and
through contract work. I also hope to get a clearer picture of a
number of things that might lead to more interesting donation
decisions in the future.

Despite not finding anything immediately worthwhile or exciting to
donate to, I did see a lot of potential opportunities. And in many
cases, the limiting factor was that there were already many other
donors who had snapped up the best opportunities. To me, this is a
good problem to have :).
