# My donation budget and fallback donation allocation

In this (fairly long!) post, I describe how I'm currently thinking of
my donation budget, and how I distinguish between opportunistic,
high-marginal-value donations and fallback donations.

Some of this goes over ground I previously tread on in my previous
posts on [my Q4 2021
donation](https://vipulnaik.com/blog/my-somewhat-unusual-q4-2021-donation/)
and [my Q1 2022
donation](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/xzQzLoEC5mvPyJTYY/my-q1-2022-donation-to-free-migration-project). However,
this post is fully focused on my overall donation strategy rather than
simply describing it in the context of specific donations.

I've written a few other blog posts in the past few years. Both the
act of writing the posts and the comments that some of the posts have
received have informed my thinking. These posts are:

* [Donor strategies for separating "how much" from "where" to donate](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/4R5f4ntM6t3GLoLTw/donor-strategies-for-separating-how-much-from-where-to)
* [Levels of donations](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/F4DxPrfmnEtEwhPJu/levels-of-donation)
* [What regrets have you had regarding past donations?](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/xvebegCf8NReJc2Lw/what-regrets-have-you-had-regarding-past-donations)

## How I see the value of various things I do

In general, I see the main vehicles through which I create value as follows:

1. Living my "regular" life, including doing my day job, interacting
   with family and friends, etc.
2. Using my time and money for personal projects with some altruistic
   bent, such as the [donations list
   website](https://donations.vipulnaik.com/) or [timelines
   wiki](https://timelines.issarice.com/)
3. Using my money for donations.

I expect that my value-add is roughly (1) > (2) > (3), though I expect
that the value-add-per-unit-time may be higher for (2) and (3) than
(1).

Given this overall view, I want to set rules on my donations in a way
that they don't undercut (1) and (2). This informs the budget that I
set for donations. I'll talk about the budget in much more detail
later in this post.

Other related things I've written:

* In the ["Sources of value" section of my post on handling
  stress](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/rBLEiEsNxpQaqwsmJ/miscellaneous-thoughts-on-handling-a-stressful-life#Sources_of_value),
  I talked about sources of purpose and pleasure. That is a bit more
  detailed and more about my moment-to-moment experience, but it has
  some overlap with how I see the overall value of things I do.

* In a [post I wrote on my old blog on three-tiered
  ethics](https://thinkingbeyondcompetition.wordpress.com/2011/01/21/a-three-tiered-view-of-ethics-and-singers-dilemma/),
  I separated out three tiers of ethics: negative rights ethics,
  contract/responsibility ethics, and excellence ethics. Earlier tiers
  of ethics take precedence over later tiers of ethics; for instance,
  if my contract requires me to kill somebody, then I would rather
  break the contract than kill. In my list above, (1) falls under
  contract/responsibility ethics, whereas (2) and (3) fall mostly
  under excellence ethics (though to some extent under
  contract/responsibility ethics to the extent that I've made
  commitments).

## Savings thresholds and donation budgets

### The extreme view of "save till you no longer need to save, then donate all net savings above the threshold"

One view, that I'm fairly sympathetic to, is the view where you
basically switch gears in life between saving and donation. To begin
with, your goal is to save enough money to build a nest egg. Once you
have achieved that, you switch to donating all your surplus income
(i.e., income - consumption).

I feel like this view is, at least in the abstract, more logically
sound than splitting your money between savings and donation. It's
more risk-averse, in the sense that if financial challenges prevent
you from hitting your savings goals, you conservatively don't donate
and save whatever you can. But it's also generous beyond the point of
hitting your savings goals.

I don't ultimately go with this extreme view, for various reasons I
articulate, but I think it should be something for people to consider.

### The other extreme view of treating donations as a fixed proportion of income or savings

In this view, you have a fixed rule around what proportion of your
income or savings you donate periodically (for instance, every
year). I talked about some of the predetermined rules people use for
such things in my post [Donor strategies for separating "how much"
from "where" to
donate](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/4R5f4ntM6t3GLoLTw/donor-strategies-for-separating-how-much-from-where-to).

I think this is a reasonably good strategy with its own advantages,
but it's already relatively well-known so I won't say much more.

### Finding a middle ground of sorts

Overall, I've picked a middle ground that combines some features from
both extremes. I have in mind a few different savings thresholds:

1. **Emergency savings threshold**: This corresponds to something like
   6-12 months of expenses. Before hitting this savings threshold, I
   would generally not donate (though, historically, I [did
   donate](https://vipulnaik.com/donation-history/) while below the
   threshold, I think this may have been the wrong choice as I did
   face a shortfall of cash that was partly caused by the donations).

2. **Money-won't-be-a-bottleneck-to-life-changes threshold**:
   Basically this is a threshold of saving at which I can make changes
   to my life without being constrained on cash. For instance, I can
   finance a move to a new city, or make a downpayment on a house if I
   determine that buying is better in the long run than renting, or
   quit my job and try something out for a year or two. I don't have
   an exact threshold here but something like 2-5 years of savings
   seems about right for this.

3. **I-have-enough-money-for-life threshold**: This is a threshold
   where I basically have enough money to finance the rest of my
   foreseeable life, after making apppropriate assumptions about
   interest rates. This is the most uncertain, particularly because it
   requires making predictions about the nature of the medium-term
   future. But if we don't believe in short timelines for very
   disruptive changes to the world, I think something like 10-30 times
   current annual spend is probably enough for this. The presence of
   various safety nets and cost-cutting measures can affect the exact
   calculation here.

My current situation is that I'm clearly past 1 and moderately past 2,
but still well short of 3. When I was below 2, making donations traded
off against having the flexibility to make life changes in a
relatively tangible way, and I was therefore extremely selective about
making donations.

Now that I'm past 2, making donations (that are small enough that I
*stay* past 2) doesn't really trade off against life changes.

However, I'm still well short of 3. If I were above 3, I would likely
adopt the extreme position of "donate all net savings" at least in
principle (though various practical considerations may still require
me to hold money while I figure out good donation targets). But I'm
not above 3, which means that I'm still trying to grow my savings. The
question then is: what sort of rule do I use to determine the amount
of money I can donate?

### Picking a donation budget

As I documented in [my Q4 2021 donation
post](https://vipulnaik.com/blog/my-somewhat-unusual-q4-2021-donation/),
I set a donation target of $1,000 per month starting July 2021. The
budget is cumulative, and I don't have to spend it, so whatever I
don't spend accrues, allowing me to save within the budget for bigger
donations.

As of October 2022, I've been in this regime for 16 months,
accumulating a budget of $16,000. I've spent $4,000 so far, so I have
$12,000 to donate.

How did I pick this donation budget? Essentially, I wanted to pick a
value that was both big enough to be worth the overhead of thinking
about it, and small enough that it didn't interfere with my regular
life or personal projects, which I believe to ultimately be more
valuable.

#### The "not too big" angle

* What kind of variation in net savings would I consider small enough
  to not worry about? If my donation budget is within that range of
  variation, it's probably okay.

* What kind of variation in after-tax income would likely not be
  decision-relevant to choosing to join or stay in a job? If my
  donation budget is within that range of variaion, it's probably
  okay.

#### The "not too small" angle

I wanted a donation budget that feels substantive and gives me "room
to play" with making serious donations. I thought about this from a few angles:

* How does it compare with my other budget line items? At $1,000 per
  month, or $12,000 per year, my donation budget is only exceeded by
  two line items: rent and contract work. My donation budget is in
  excess of my other nontrivial line items such as food, health
  insurance, web hosting, and health care.

* What [level of
  donation](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/F4DxPrfmnEtEwhPJu/levels-of-donation)
  does it place me at? Assuming I donate about once a year, it puts me
  at level 2, which is a high enough level that I can do some
  meaningful investigation for each donation, and where there starts
  being a meaningful probability of meeting highly specific funding
  gaps.

### Minimum donation targets and fallback donations

When I initially picked a donation budget, it only set an upper bound,
with no expectation that I'd actually make donations at any specific
rate. At the time, the concept of a donation budget was relatively
new, and I wasn't sure what sort of donation opportunities I would be
interested in.

However, now (October 2022) I want to also set some rule to make sure
I do spend at least some of my donation budget, while still allowing
for accumulation to finance potentially larger donations in the
future.
