On March 31, 2019, I donated 3200 GBP to the [EA
Hotel](https://eahotel.org)
[fundraiser](https://eahotel.org/fundraiser/) via
[GoFundMe](https://www.gofundme.com/ea-hotel). The donation cost me
$4,306.14 USD. My decision was based mainly on the information in the
EA Hotel page and the [documents linked from the donations list
website page on EA
Hotel](https://donations.vipulnaik.com/donee.php?donee=EA+Hotel#doneeDocumentList),
which include the recent Effective Altruism Forum posts.

In this post, I describe the reasons that influenced my decision to
donate. I *didn't draft the post **before** donating*, so some of the
elaboration includes aspects that didn't (at least consciously)
influence my donation decision.

I limited the time I spent writing the post, and will most likely not
be able to respond to comments. But please feel free to comment with
your thoughts in response to my post or other comments!

**NOTE: I have no affiliation with the EA Hotel. I have never visited
  it, nor have I closely collaborated with anybody living there. I did
  not show this post to anybody affiliated with the EA Hotel before
  posting. Nothing here should be taken as an official statement about
  the EA Hotel.**

The sections of the post:

* [I like the idea of the EA Hotel](#i-like-the-idea-of-the-ea-hotel)
* [I like the skin-in-the-game of the key players](#i-like-the-skin-in-the-game-of-the-key-players)
* [I like the execution so far](#i-like-the-execution-so-far)
* [I see institutional risk reasons for lack of institutional funding](#i-see-institutional-risk-reasons-for-lack-of-institutional-funding): These reasons don't apply to individual donors, so I am not too concerned about the lack of institutional funding as a reason to dissuade me from donating
* [I have not been dissuaded by the reasons against donating that I have seen so far](#i-have-not-been-dissuaded-by-the-reasons-against-donating-that-i-have-seen-so-far)
* [I find the value of marginal donations high and easy to grasp](#i-find-the-value-of-marginal-donations-high-and-easy-to-grasp)

## I like the idea of the EA Hotel

My interpretation of the fundamental problem the EA Hotel is trying to
solve: provide low-cost and optimized transient living arrangements to
people engaged in self-study or early stages of projects. The hotel's
low-cost living arrangements are further subsidized so that long-term
residents don't have to pay anything at all, and in fact, get a
stipend to cover some living expenses. This means that residents can
pursue projects with single-minded focus without burning through
savings or having to do additional jobs just to keep themselves
financially afloat.

The backdrop of the problem, as I understand:

* EA communities have congregated in some of the most expensive places
  in the world, such as the San Francisco Bay Area, Boston/Cambridge,
  New York City, and London. Even outside of these, most places with
  significant numbers of EAs tend to be cities, and these tend to have
  higher costs of living.

* Most EA projects have trouble raising enough money to cover costs of
  living in these places, even after they get funding. Moreover, most
  EA organizations, which are also based in these areas, do not pay
  enough of a premium for people to build savings that would allow
  them to comfortably spend months working on such projects in these
  expensive locations.

* Tendencies within EA to donate large fractions of one's personal
  wealth may have further exacerbated people's lack of adequate
  savings to pursue EA projects.

These problems, specially the first one, have been widely
acknowledged. Attempts to figure out a new, lower-cost city for EAs
and build group housing in that city started since as far back as
2014, when the [Coordination of Rationality/EA/SSC Housing Project
group](https://www.facebook.com/groups/664817953593844/) was
[created](https://www.facebook.com/groups/664817953593844/permalink/664817956927177/). Browsing
through the archives of that Facebook group is interesting because it
shows the amount of effort that has gone in over the years in
identifying lower-cost living places for EAs. This is the group where
EA Hotel founder Greg Colbourn [first
announced](https://www.facebook.com/groups/664817953593844/permalink/1481373815271583/)
his intention to buy a hotel in Blackpool.

Side note: Peter McCluskey's
[comment](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ek299LpWZvWuoNeeg/usd100-prize-to-best-argument-against-donating-to-the-ea#zSKSj4py552iHfdSQ)
suggests that complaining about the high rent in major hubs is a
signal of low status, because the most successful and influential
people don't seem to complain about it. This does not accord with my
impression. More successful people tend to personally be able to
afford high rents, but I've seen concern about high cost of living
among people across the spectrum. It's more that the set of
high-status influential people doesn't overlap much with the set of
people who are most vocal about this problem and most interested in
solving it.

## I like the skin-in-the-game of the key players

One of the main problems with executing a project like the EA Hotel is
that it is capital-intensive: a lot of money needs to be put in to
implement an idea like this in a manner that is low-cost in the long
run. In this case, Greg Colbourn had to spend 130,000 GBP to buy the
EA Hotel, and this was after getting it at a cheap price! For
comparison, Berkeley REACH pays something like $6,000 per month for
rent for a cafe in Berkeley.

I find it impressive that Greg put his own money into purchasing the
building and financing the first year of the hotel's operations, at a
time when getting outside support would be hard.

Also, browsing through the [Coordination of Rationality/EA/SSC Housing
Project group](https://www.facebook.com/groups/664817953593844/)
archives, it looks like both Greg and Toon Alfrink, the hotel's
manager, have participated in the group for quite a while. While that
doesn't in and of itself mean much, it does underscore their long-term
commitment to the vision.

Skin-in-the-game of key players is very important for me when making a
sizable donation to an organization that has not yet achieved the
level of financial stability that would make its survival automatic.

## I like the execution so far

This breaks down into a lot of pieces:

* I like both the high demand and the competence exhibited in meeting
  the demand effectively
* I like that the residents are very positive about the hotel
* I find the resident profiles and their projects reasonably
  impressive
* I like the openness about the hotel operations and the detailed
  information available on the website
* I like the cost-effectiveness of the hotel and think it solves the
  problem (of providing low-cost living) that it set out to solve

### I like both the high demand and the competence exhibited in meeting the demand effectively

The public announcement about the specific EA Hotel, after buying it, was made by Greg Colbourn on [June 18, 2018](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/JdqHvyy2Tjcj3nKoD/ea-hotel-with-free-accommodation-and-board-for-two-years). Occupancy started climbing through July and August. On August 9, the website had been launched and bookings could be made through the website.

By September, the hotel appeared to be running in full steam, and even
got press coverage in [The
Economist](https://www.economist.com/britain/2018/09/06/effective-altruists-aim-to-change-the-world-from-a-blackpool-hotel)
and [The
Times](https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/hotel-with-free-b-b-for-guests-who-save-humanity-9fcx5qdlj). For
the last six months, the hotel appears to have been operating at
reasonably high occupancy. The occupancy chart across time is
available with the header "Number of guests over time" on the [EA
Hotel wiki](https://eahotel.org/wiki/).
  
Starting a new project and immediately getting traction is
impressive. It's even more impressive to have been able to cope well
with the demand and keep the hotel residents satisfied.

### I like that the residents are very positive about the hotel

Hotel residents appear quite positive about their experience at the
hotel; see for instance
[grue_slinky](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ek299LpWZvWuoNeeg/usd100-prize-to-best-argument-against-donating-to-the-ea)
and
[Matt Goldenberg (halffull)](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/sigun924gsxN4oZq2/the-case-for-the-ea-hotel).

### I find the resident profiles and their projects reasonably impressive

The
description of the [residents so
far](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/j7xz4rQidfRgFo6KC/ea-hotel-fundraiser-2-current-guests-and-their-projects)
and the [projects and work
completed](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/dLGM88JRE96iHd7z4/ea-hotel-fundraiser-4-concrete-outputs-after-10-months)
are both decent, and particularly good for something that's just
gotten off the ground.

### I like the openness about the hotel operations and the detailed information available on the website

The EA Hotel website offers a lot of valuable information for
potential hotel residents, but also for others interested in
understanding the progress of the hotel. For instance, it includes a
description of current guests and their work, a historical occupancy
chart, and detailed information about food, cleaning and laundry,
showers, wifi, and more.

The EA Hotel team has also been quite forthcoming in sharing
information in their fundraiser posts, including information they
didn't initially expect to share.

### I like the cost-effectiveness of the hotel and think it solves the problem (of providing low-cost living) that it set out to solve

Let's dig more into this. The official estimate for the EA Hotel is a
cost of 5700 GBP per resident per year, including the stipend paid out
to them. That translates to about $7500 USD per person per year.

How low-cost is this compared to other options? It's definitely
cheaper than the average deal in the San Francisco Bay Area or New
York City. My anecdotal evidence suggests it would be very very hard
to get a place in the San Francisco Bay Area where even the rent +
utilities is lower than $7500/year, and once you add food, it will
clearly exceed that range. Landing a good deal like this would itself
take weeks if not months of searching, time that can burn savings or
runway.

I know of two categories of options that would be cheaper than the EA
Hotel:

* Living with others who are taking care of the main living expenses:
  This could mean living with parents or with a spouse, a sibling, or
  friends, who are shouldering the majority of the household living
  expenses. Depending on the living arrangement, the marginal cost of
  the resident may not be too high. For instance, you might be living
  with your parents in a room in their house, but they wouldn't have
  rented it out otherwise, so the effective rent cost is zero. Food,
  utilities, etc. are all shared, and the marginal cost of your food
  and utilities would likely be in the $200 to $400 range. Similar
  arrangements may exist with a spouse or sibling.

* Living in a much lower-cost part of the world: Example places
  include Eastern Europe, Southeast Asia, and South Asia.

The disadvantages of these options:

* Some people may not have others willing to take care of main living
  expenses, or may not be comfortable seeking their help: In
  particular, a person who quits a well-paying job to work on an EA
  project may not feel comfortable or welcomed reducing living costs
  by going and living with their parents.

* Living in places with different culture and language may not be
  conducive to focusing on an EA project: Going to Thailand or Romania
  to cut costs may mean too much adjustment time and effort and not
  enough resources left to focus on the project. For some people, this
  option might actually work well, based on their background and
  comfort levels in different places. But for others, this option may
  not work.

* In both cases, one does not have the advantage of being plugged into
  a network of other people also working on and motivated to make
  progress on similar projects.

Based on this analysis, I think the EA Hotel offers a good option that
is not clearly dominated by any other. Moreover, the general idea of
having such a hotel, if successful, could be replicated in other
locations. That would lead to a wider range of price points to meet
the needs of people with different trade-offs.

## I see institutional risk reasons for lack of institutional funding

According to [a comment on a question asking why the EA Hotel is
having trouble fundraising](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/BNQbxX7bFRrgv8Yds/why-is-the-ea-hotel-having-trouble-fundraising#hKjqSkH3cF7Gx42KK):

> EA Grants is taking a long time to review the hotel's
> application. There have been rumours that this is because of one or
> several of the following: (a.) staffing issues at CEA which have
> only recently been resolved; (b.) desire to perform an audit/review
> of the hotel. Also, to see some operational changes at the hotel
> before extending runway; (c.) a strategic decision to delay funding
> the hotel as a countermeasure against cultural dilution, or PR
> risk. (c.) seems unlikely.

I can't speak to the accuracy of the claims here, but they are
suggestive.

The EA Hotel is a sufficiently distinctive project, and also an
incubator of many other projects, that institutions funding it may
perceive risk to their reputation from even one of the funded projects
by the EA Hotel going wrong. I don't expect this to prevent the EA
Hotel from getting institutionally funded in the long run. But I do
expect the process to take longer. I think a stronger, longer track
record will be needed before it gets funded by EA Funds, EA Grants, or
other larger sources of funding in the EA community.

This means that individual donors, who have less of these
institutional risk concerns, have a bigger role to play in the
beginning.

## I have not been dissuaded by the reasons against donating that I have seen so far

This applies first and foremost to the reasons I had access to prior
to making my donation decision. But I've been keeping an eye on the
comments on the [Grue Slinky's $100 prize for best argument
post](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ek299LpWZvWuoNeeg/usd100-prize-to-best-argument-against-donating-to-the-ea), the [question post by Milan
Griffes](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/BNQbxX7bFRrgv8Yds/why-is-the-ea-hotel-having-trouble-fundraising#hKjqSkH3cF7Gx42KK), and the [case for the EA hotel post](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/sigun924gsxN4oZq2/the-case-for-the-ea-hotel)
and even now, I don't see anything that changes my stance
meaningfully.

My synthesis of the arguments so far is that there is a strong prior
in favor of supporting individuals and projects directly rather than
supporting the EA Hotel. In this view, the evidence emerging from the
EA Hotel so far does not meaningfully alter that prior. Different
variants of this story:

* *Challenging the idea of the hotel as a hub*: The very idea of having
  people congregate at the EA Hotel to work doesn't make sense; it
  doesn't add value relative to them going to other places and
  working.

* *Challenging the financing model of the hotel*: The EA Hotel is a
  great idea, and should continue to exist as an option for
  individuals working on projects, but individuals coming to the EA
  Hotel should get their own funding and pay at cost. This will reduce
  the EA Hotel's operational costs to near-zero, because it is
  recovering costs from all residents (this is Argument 2 in Brendon
  Wong's
  [comment](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ek299LpWZvWuoNeeg/usd100-prize-to-best-argument-against-donating-to-the-ea#WhZ8JQ2Dwsj5r4jvL)).

* *Challenging the specific accomplishments so far*: The specifics that
  we have of the EA Hotel residents and their outputs is not yet
  strong enough evidence that the EA Hotel can generate significant
  value. However, if in the future, much more high-value stuff comes
  out of the EA Hotel, the EA Hotel would become a worthwile donation
  target.

I see all the critiques as having some value. In fact, it may well be
the case that the sustainable model for the hotel in the long term
would be to put a much lower ceiling on the number of long-term
residents for whom fees are waived. Nonetheless, I think the evidence
so far is positive enough, and the people involved in running the
hotel have enough skin in the game, that I expect with high
probability that they will make the necessary adjustments based on the
feedback they get. In the meantime, I think there is a lot of value in
this experiment, and I want there to be enough room for the EA Hotel
team to plan the transition and tweaking of their models without
causing too much disruption.

## I find the value of marginal donations high and easy to grasp

The EA Hotel has a relatively easy-to-grasp operational math: it costs
about 240 GBP per day to run, with the cost varying a bit based on
current occupancy, and in particular on the mix of residents (how many
are paying cost and how many are staying for free). The fundraiser
uses this math to ask for 130,000 GBP to cover 18 months of
operations. Greg Colbourn gives a figure of 265 GBP in [this
comment](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/j7xz4rQidfRgFo6KC/ea-hotel-fundraiser-2-current-guests-and-their-projects#zdBxm7b9wD4BpfQQY)
but clarifies that actual costs in January and Febrary where 25% less after factoring in rent paid costs; I'm taking 240 GBP as somewhere in between the theoretical figure and the observed figure for January and February.

In the same comment, Colbourn says:

> Our costs are ~£8k/month, so even buying a month or two runway would
> make a big difference in terms of giving us some breathing space to
> work on getting more money coming in. It's also approximately
> continuously divisible in that every ~£265 will keep us going
> another day.

With this model of spending, I can concretely think of my donation of
3200 GBP as having added about 13 days to the hotel's runway.

The aspect of this that's hard to quantify: I'm not actually just
buying 13 days of the hotel's operations. My goal is to help the hotel
extend its runway so that it can be better equipped to do some
combination of raising more money and making the operational changes
needed to survive with whatever money it has. How good 13 days is in
terms of making the hotel more likely to fundraise enough money to
survive in the long term, I don't know. Nonetheless, it is still a
relatively clear calculation with a potential for high impact.

The other part that is hard to predict in advance: how much my
donation might trigger other donations. It is possible that some large
donations can spur other large donations by sending a signal. It's
even possible that this post might convince more people to donate to
the EA Hotel, though that is not the primary purpose of my writing
this post.

One area of concern I have is that the
[fundraiser](https://www.gofundme.com/ea-hotel) has not gone well. I
am not concerned in terms of what it says about the value of funding
the hotel, but I do have concern in terms of what it says about the
hotel's ability to raise funds in the longer term. However, I chose to
donate despite this because:

* The EA Hotel team seems to be superfocused on actually running the
  hotel, and doing a good job of it. It's natural if this doesn't
  leave a lot of time or energy for fundraising.

* As mentioned earlier, both Greg Colbourn and Toon Alfrink seem to
  have enough skin in the game that I'm somewhat confident that with
  more resources they will be able to focus their attention on the
  problem of funding.

* Judging from the past history of similar EA projects, such as
  Berkeley REACH, there may well be an inflection point coming soon
  when the donation volume to the EA Hotel goes up. With Berkeley
  REACH, the situation seemed quite dire till June 2018, but then with
  both Eliezer and Ben Hoffman plugging REACH, a number of people made
  pledges. Later, REACH also got institutional funding from BERI and
  EA Funds. Today, REACH has [$3,528 in committed monthly
  funds](https://www.patreon.com/berkeleyreach).
