# My Q1 2022 donation to Free Migration Project

I'm planning to make a donation of 3,000 USD to [Free Migration
Project](https://freemigrationproject.org/) in January 2022. This blog
post goes in some detail on my reasoning.

I'm planning to cross-post this to openborders.info (given that the
grantee works in that area) as well as the EA Forum (given that some
of my decision-making process was guided by principles similar to
effective altruist principles). Some sections of the post are
explicitly targeted at the respective audiences of those sites.

## Background of where I am with respect to donations

In a [November 11, 2021 post on another
donation](https://vipulnaik.com/blog/my-somewhat-unusual-q4-2021-donation/),
I wrote extensively about where I currently am with respect to
donations. The TL;DR is that right now, I'm only looking at
time-sensitive donation opportunities that beat fallback donation
targets (such as the EA Funds and the GiveWell Maximum Impact Fund),
and I'm not being super-proactive in identifying these opportunities.

I am also limiting my budget to 1,000 USD per month starting July
2021. As of January 2022, the total amount I can spend would be $7,000
(for 7 months) of which I already spent $1,000 on the previous
donation. My donation to FMP thus uses up $3,000 of the remaining
$6,000, still leaving an unallocated $3,000 that would roll over to
increase the budget for potential future donations.

## Some considerations specific to my relationship with Free Migration Project

### I served on the Free Migration Project board from May 2016 to December 2021 and have had past connections with its founder

I was one of the founding board members of Free Migration Project,
attending its first board meeting in May 2016. I'm stepping down from
the board at the end of December 2021, a little before my maximum of
six years on the board would be completed.

I have known David (Dave) Bennion, FMP's founder, since 2013, and Dave
mooted the idea that would lead to FMP back in October 2015. I also
wrote the email introducing Dave to Alexander Berger, then Program
Officer for U.S. Policy at Open Philanthropy; this would ultimately
result in a [$24,000 grant from Open
Philanthropy](https://www.openphilanthropy.org/focus/us-policy/immigration-policy/free-migration-project-planning-grant). I
don't think the fact of me doing the introduction had much effect on
FMP getting the grant.

In the [proposal that David Bennion submitted for
FMP](https://www.openphilanthropy.org/files/Grants/Free_Migration_Project/Free_Migration_Project_funding_proposal_(OPP)_final.pdf),
he mentions discovering [openborders.info](https://openborders.info/)
in 2013 as one of the influences that led him to start FMP. I had
originally started openborders.info back in March 2012.

### I donated in December 2019 to discharge my "board member" obligation

In December 2019, I made a $3,000 USD donation to Free Migration
Project. I described my reasons for the donation on my [donation
history](https://vipulnaik.com/donation-history/) page:

> I see it as the equivalent of sending $500/year for 6 years, which
> is the duration of my board tenure. There isn’t a very specific
> reason for the timing, other than the fact that at the end of the
> year, I’m thinking about donation opportunities and in particular
> looking at donations that I have some sense of “obligation” to
> make. [...] I’m not planning to make a followup donation in the near
> future, since this donation discharges my responsibility; any
> further donation decisions will be based on the same sort of
> extensive analysis that I subjected my EA Hotel donation to.

### As a board member, I have access to private information and this influences my decision somewhat

As a board member, I have had access to a lot of private information
about Free Migration Project. None of this private information is
inconsistent with, or even surprising given, public
information. However, the private information does give me a clearer
picture of the organization that outsiders don't have, which gives me
more confidence about some things.

While I would be open to writing about relevant details in the future
in depth after running them by FMP, the time constraints I currently
have for this post don't permit that. However, I can describe some of
the kinds of information I have access to, that influences my decision
to donate, that an outsider wouldn't have access to:

* Information on foundation funding received by FMP, including the
  names of foundations, and in many cases the amount and the timing of
  commitment and disbursement (only a subset of this information is
  public)
* Access to FMP's strategic plans and some of the legal and tax filings
* Access to board meeting minutes (as well as my memory of having
  attended the board meetings) that includes summaries of FMP's
  program work, fundraising challenges, and more, at various points in
  time over the past six years
* Access to various evaluations done by board members and staff of the
  executive director
* Information on FMP's budget and finances

I will not have continued access to further board updates starting
2022, and any additional information I have access to will be through
explicit sharing by FMP with me.

I would say the most crucial piece of private information I have is
around the current financial state of the organization, which gives me
a clearer sense of the value of marginal donations.

### As a board member, I was asked (not forced!) to contribute to FMP's end-of-year fundraiser

For various reasons (increased staff size meaning a larger annual
budget for 2022, some delays with foundation funding being disbursed),
FMP is holding a larger end-of-year fundraiser than usual, targeting
$20,000 (this is only a small portion of their annual operating
expenses; it's just an amount that was considered a reasonable goal
for an end-of-year fundraiser). As a board member, I was asked to
think of ways to contribute.

The most common, and the suggested, way for board members to
contribute was to run fundraisers. For various reasons, my preferred
mode of contribution was to donate directly rather than run a
fundraiser; I describe my thinking on this point later in the post.

The "ask" made of board members did not significantly affect my
decision to donate or of how much to donate. I feel that I have
already discharged my basic financial obligations as a board member
with my December 2019 donation, and if I had ultimately decided
against the donation, I would not have felt bad about this. However,
some of the backdrop (that led to the ask) did influence my decision.

## Some background thinking motivating this donation

### My reasons for thinking of FMP as worth supporting

My main reason for supporting Free Migration Project is that it is one
of the few organizations (and the only one I clearly know) that
supports freedom of movement as its core mission. As the person who
started openborders.info, I think this is an important cause, and I
think even the *existence* of FMP helps continue to generate
visibility for this super-important cause. This provides a kind of
lower bound on FMP's value; even if I were completely unconvinced by
the value of FMP's program work, FMP's total budget is so small in the
grand scheme of things that it seems, from a big-picture philanthropic
perspective, that it more than pays for itself.

In terms of activities, the main thing FMP does to directly promote
open borders is organize the [Open Borders
Conference](https://openborders.info/open-borders-conference/). I
[reviewed the 2021
conference](https://openborders.info/blog/open-borders-conference-2021-review/)
and overall think the conference is pretty good. I did a little
thought experiment a while ago -- could something like the Open
Borders Conference exist without FMP? I think it could, but it would
probably be harder to organize, and it would likely fluctuate more
year-to-year based on the whims of individuals involved, rather than
being a steady part of the landscape.

Existence value and the Open Borders Conference are my two main
reasons. I still haven't fully wrapped my head around how to assess
the direct, object-level impact of FMP's legal representation work and
its activism on beneficiaries. I'm reasonably confident the impact is
positive, but have no idea how it stacks up against other
philanthropic activities that help people.

For my donation, thus, I strictly considered *only* the two things I
could get a grip on: existence value, and the Open Borders Conference.

### FMP has room for more funding

FMP is a small organization and has a small budget. It currently has
only three full-time employees. So it doesn't need a lot of money.

However, as of the time of my donation, it is meaningfully short on
funds. Part of this is due to some foundation funding that had been
committed but not disbursed yet. Part of this is because FMP's staff
had expanded from a size of one (two years ago) to a size of three,
and the fundraising operation had not scaled appropriately.

One other factor is that with the replacement of immigration hardliner
Trump by the more moderate Biden, much of the money that would have
funded migration-related activism has dried up, as donors have chosen
to focus on other causes. Since my interest in free migration is more
long-term and not related specifically to the margins of US federal
politics, this seems like the right time for donors with my mindset to
step in.

## Reasons for amount

### My donation budget

As I mentioned earlier in the post, I am accumulating a donation
budget of 1,000 USD per month starting July 2021. By January 2022, I
will have $7,000 accumulated, of which I've spent $1,000 so far,
leaving $6,000. However, I'm making the decision and commitment in
December, so in my mind I was really playing with only $6,000 - $1,000
= $5,000.

The donation budget sets an upper bound; I believe that there's a
decent chance that I will identify better donation targets in the
coming months, and do want to leave some of my donation budget for
those better targets. That partly explains why I am not spending the
entirety of the $6,000 or $5,000.

I would say that my donation budget is one of the main reasons I
didn't donate more, but a greater donation budget wouldn't translate
directly to the same increase in how much of a donation I would
make. I did a little thought experiment and estimated that I could go
up to $5,000 if my donation budget were around $15,000, and up to
$10,000 if my donation budget was around $50,000. This brings me to
the next topic, the marginal value of funding. (Basically this is
trading off the known value of FMP against the value of future
opportunities and the likely funds I will need in order to be able to
fund those opportunities).

### Marginal value of funding for FMP

The amount I have chosen falls well within the range where marginal
funding directly helps FMP with its goal of continued existence, which
is necessary for its existence value and its ability to sponsor the
Open Borders Conference (the two reasons I want to donate to it).

Since I limited my investigation to the range of values that I was
actually likely to donate, I don't have a very exact sense of the
marginal value of substantially larger amounts of funding, nor is this
the right post to go over that. But I can say the following:

* I do suspect diminishing returns in donations to FMP to quite an
  extent (for my goals of existence value and ability to sponsor the
  Open Borders Conference), and I do think $3,000 is enough to see at
  least some meaningful change in the slope of the marginal value
  curve. So the first $3,000 I donated are much more valuable than the
  next $3,000.

* The investigation I did would make me confident of donating up to
  $10,000 if my donation budget were not constrained, even taking into
  account other funds FMP expects to raise. After $10,000, I wouldn't
  be sure this is a clearly time-sensitive opportunity that beats out
  fallback donation targets (which are actually pretty good
  value-for-money, so this is a high bar). To be clear, $10,000 is way
  less than the amount FMP needs for its budget. And also, my
  investigation scope was limited to looking at the kind of funds I
  actually expect to give.

One takeaway for other donors: if you're fully aligned with me and
less constrained than I am on donation budget, I think donating up to
$7,000 total would be great. I don't expect to influence more than 2-3
people, so donating up to $1,000 should be safe; even if 3 people
ended up donating $1,000 based on this post it would still be well
under the $7,000.

## Reasons for timing

### FMP's financial situation

One of the main reasons for the timing is FMP's financial situation. I
already described some general aspects of this in an earlier section
"FMP has room for more funding". I can't go into further details, but
basically I do believe this is one of those relatively rare times in
the organization's history where the value of donations is high.

### My donation budget accumulation

As I mentioned earlier in the post, I am accumulating a donation
budget of 1,000 USD per month starting July 2021. By January 2022, I
will have $7,000 accumulated, of which I've spent $1,000 so far,
leaving $6,000. This gives me room to make donations.

### My exit from the board

Even before being apprised of the financial situation, I had been
considering making some sort of donation to mark my exit from the Free
Migration Project board at the end of 2021, as a sort of "parting
gift". However, this consideration is minor in the scheme of things.

### Maturing of background investigation

I have been thinking off and on about related topics and collecting
information over the past few months. Around December, I felt I had
enough information to make a case (to myself) for a donation.

My [Open Borders Conference 2021
review](https://openborders.info/blog/open-borders-conference-2021-review/)
can be thought of as one public-facing piece of such background
investigation; so can my [post on understanding Open Philanthropy's
migration policy
work](https://openborders.info/blog/understanding-open-philanthropys-work-migration-policy/). My
work on the [timeline of immigration detention in the United
States](https://timelines.issarice.com/wiki/Timeline_of_immigration_detention_in_the_United_States)
and the [Berks County Residential
Center](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berks_County_Residential_Center)
was also for the loosely related goal of understanding the space.

### Tax considerations favored deferring the donation to January

*Content warning: technical section, highly specific to US income
 taxes, people in high-tax states, and people within some income
 brackets. This section can be skipped without loss of context.*

My [only donation in
2021](https://vipulnaik.com/blog/my-somewhat-unusual-q4-2021-donation/)
was not tax-deductible in the United States. Thanks to the SALT
deduction cap of $10,000, and the fact that my California state taxes
are over $10,000, the total deductions I can take if I itemize
deductions are $10,000 + charitable donations. The standard deduction
for 2021 is $12,550 and the standard deduction for 2022 is $12,950.

Donations to FMP are tax-deductible.

So we can run the two scenarios:

* Scenario 1: I donate $3,000 to FMP in 2021. I get to itemize
  deductions, since my itemized deductions of $10,000 + $3,000 =
  $13,000 exceed the standard deduction of $12,550. I save $13,000 -
  $12,550 = $450 in taxable income (so something between $100 and $200
  in taxes).

  However, for 2022, I start from scratch, and my first $2,950 of
  donations are not tax-free since that's what's needed to make my
  itemized deductions reach the standard deduction threshold.

* Scenario 2: I donate $3,000 to FMP in 2022.

  In this case, for 2021, I just take the standard deduction of
  $12,550. I don't get benefits of extra deductions.

  For 2022, since $10,000 + $3,000 = $13,000 exceeds the standard
  deduction of $12,950, I itemize my deductions. I save $50 in taxable
  income, which is between $10 and $20 in taxes -- not a big deal. But
  now, all further donations in 2022 are tax-free.

So if I'm planning to donate $X in tax-deductible donations in 2022
(over and above this FMP donation), my total saving, across both
years, over the standard deduction works out to:

 Scenarios  | Case X < 2,950 | Case X >= 2,950
 --         | --             | --
 Scenario 1 | 450            | 450 + (X - 2,950) = X - 2,500
 Scenario 2 | 50 + X         | 50 + X

After some further math, we find that if X >= 400, then Scenario 2 is
preferable to Scenario 1. So if I expect to donate at least $400 in
2022 (over and above this $3,000 FMP donation), I expect to save on
taxes by deferring to 2022. The amount I save on taxable income is X -
400 for X up to 2,950, and for larger X it's just 2,550 USD.

The intuitive explanation for this:

* Let's say that the standard deduction didn't change across
  years. Then it would always make sense to engage in [donation
  bunching](https://www.benkuhn.net/bunching/), so that as much of
  your donations as possible are working to reduce your taxable
  income. Since I didn't make other donations in 2021 but might in
  2022, this argues for deferring to 2022.
  
* However, the standard deduction increases each year, so that is an
  argument for donating earlier so as to benefit from having more of a
  reduction in taxable income from exceeding the standard deduction.

* Combining both of these considerations, we see that the amount we
  plan to donate in 2022 needs to exceed the standard deduction
  increase from 2021 to 2022 (namely $400) in order for us to benefit
  from deferring to 2022.

Although I'm not totally sure, I actually do expect that I'm likely to
donate at least $400 in 2022 excluding the FMP $3,000 donation, so it
makes sense to defer. With that said, if I ended up donating less than
$400, I would not be devastated. I'm unlikely to deliberately change
my donation behavior to get past the $400 point just to prove my past
self right.

### I did confirm that deferring from December to January did not meaningfully affect FMP's finances

In general, tax considerations are only a minor factor in my donation
decisions. In fact, neither [my Q1 2019 EA Hotel donation
decision](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/BM2DYWpM6rSxyZ7AS/my-q1-2019-ea-hotel-donation)
nor [my most recent
donation](https://vipulnaik.com/blog/my-somewhat-unusual-q4-2021-donation/)
were tax-deductible for me, but I made them. FMP is tax-deductible,
and if considerations on the FMP side led me to believe that there was
a significant benefit from donating sooner, I would have done so.

However, based on the information I had, I concluded that donating in
January -- as long as I committed and communicated the donation in
December -- would be good enough.

## Potential future donations

### A lot depends on other donation opportunities I might find

It's possible that over the coming months, I will find other donation
opportunities that I consider a more meaningful use of my donation
budget. I'm not committing anything to FMP beyond this donation;
moreover, since I am exiting the board I won't have any obligations of
any sort.

### I would want to understand FMP's role in spreading the idea of free movement and open borders better

If I were to donate to FMP in the future, or to recommend to others to
donate more to it, one thing I'd like to nail down is a better picture
of how exactly FMP is spreading the idea of free migration and open
borders, and how successful it has been. I might have further
conversations with Dave on this point in the coming weeks and months,
and might write more about this (even if I don't make a further
donation, as long as I think there's enough value in what FMP is doing
to be worth bringing to the attention of others).

## Thoughts on fundraising dynamics
