On October 9, 2021, I made a donation that might be considered
somewhat unusual: a $1,000 gift (along with overhead, this came to
$1,004.99) to the blogger behind [The Fangirl
Verdict](https://thefangirlverdict.com/). This may come as a bit
surprising, given my past [donation
history](https://vipulnaik.com/donation-history/) and my interest in
[effective altruism](https://vipulnaik.com/effective-altruism/).

I thought I would write a little bit more about my thinking behind
this donation, as well as more generally my thinking about donation,
hence this post. Nothing here is being presented as a recommendation
for others to follow.

## Background on where I am with respect to donations

### The kinds of donations I am looking to make

My financial state is at the point where I feel like I've accumulated
enough savings to be comfortable consideering time-sensitive donation
opportunities -- and also comfortable investigating potential
opportunities -- but not enough savings for me to be actively looking
for ways to give it away. I also haven't signed any pledges around
giving, and in general I don't feel any obligation to hit specific
giving targets, but I do in general plan to continue accumulating
money with the possibility of either donating it or using it to
finance future activities (such as quitting my job and trying
something where I don't get paid).

There are a number of "fallback" donation targets including the EA
Funds and the GiveWell Maximum Impact Fund. If I had enough savings
that I was actively looking to give it away (and here I am thinking of
something in the range of millions of dollars, which would be enough
to last me a lifetime and then some), my strategy would be something
like this:

1. Proactively investigate donation opportunities that are
   likely to beat the fallback donation targets.
2. After exhausting those (either not finding any within a
   predetermined time limit, or meeting their funding gaps), donate
   the rest of the money to the dallback donation targets.

I am currently *not* at the level of savings where I'm actively
looking to give it away. So, in particular, I won't do step 2; I will
limit my donation efforts to step 1. And even within step 1, my
investigation's "proactive" nature will be limited, because giving
away money is not a priority. Moreover, I will give more priority to
relatively time-sensitive donation opportunities, and not focus on
other donation opportunities that I can revisit later when I have more
money and more information. So it really boils down to just:

> Investigate time-sensitive donation opportunities that are likely to
> beat the fallback donation targets, and make donations to them if I
> am moderately convinced of them.

I think of my [Q1 2019 EA Hotel
donation](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/BM2DYWpM6rSxyZ7AS/my-q1-2019-ea-hotel-donation)
as being a donation of the above kind: a time-sensitive donation
oportunity that, for the windw oof time-sensitivity, is likely to beat
the fallback donation targets. I am planning to write a retrospective
on it at some point; my preliminary retrospective assessment of that
donation is positive.

### The donation amounts I am thinking about

My general budget for donations as of now is a minimum of zero and a
maximum of $1,000 per month, averaged over months. I also loosely set
a minimum donation size of $1,000 to justify the overhead costs of
decisionmaking. So for instance if I make one donation in six months
it could be anywhere from $1,000 to $6,000.

I decided on this budget starting July 2021, and this is my first
donation since then (though I have considered others).

### Donations versus gifts

I may make exceptions for some "good citizen" / signaling donations
e.g. donating to an open source project or musician to fund their
work, in lieu of purchasing it from them. I think of those more as
gifts than donations. I don't make those most of the time, but I do
leave the door open for such things and wouldn't count it in the
bucket of donations.

One simple criterion is that the size of a "gift" usually won't be
more than three times the amount I would pay for buying the thing if I
had to spend money to acquire it. For instance, if I would pay $10 for
a book, and it's being offered for free and has a tip jar, a donation
of up to $30 would in my mind be classed as a "gift". The key thing in
my mind is that the justification is a
Kantian/decision-theory/coordination-style thinking of "a world where
a lot of people behaved like me things would be better" rather than
"my donation in and of itself is making things better".

The donation / gift distinction is important, because the particular
donation that is the subject of this post might be thought of as a
gift. And indeed, if the amount had been something like $30, I would
consider it a gift. But an amount of $1,000 is well over three times
my private willingness-to-pay for the work I am supporting, and
therefore I think of it more in philanthropic terms (and it also has
to correspondingly meet the standards applied to a donation, and count
against the corresponding budget).

## Some background thinking motivating this donation

### Moving the world toward legibility

I have a qualitative picture of the way I want to see the world move,
and one of the qualities that interest me is *legibility*: bringing
the world more within our understanding. I even mooted the idea of
sponsoring a Legibility Prize at some point, and though I didn't act
on it, I would probably retroactively declare this donation as being a
Legibility Prize award.

A bit more background. I think a lot of public social efforts,
particularly the ones that are more successful, are designed with
perhaps ignoble goals in mind, including the goal to use manipulative
tactics of persuasion, and methods that involve disrespecting the time
and attention of people to further one's interests. Sleazy online
advertising is the most obvious example, but I also have in mind the
proliferation of low-quality, average, uninsightful content slapped
with lots of ads to "monetize" it well.

Some people and groups have fought these tendencies well, championing
genuineness and true efforts to make the world more legible by shining
light on it. I think LessWrong is great in its own way. I like how
examine.com [holds its guns](https://examine.com/about/) against many
other health websites by maintaining longer, more comprehensive pages
rather than churning out lots of shorter, more sensationalistic pages
cluttered with ads (as is the trend on other health sites). I liked
how GiveWell bucked the received wisdom back in the late 2000s and
published long, detailed reviews of its top charities to help truly
inform donors.

### Individual efforts on legibility

While organizational and community efforts to share information and
make the world more legible are valuable, so are the efforts of
individuals, whether it is bloggers like [gwern](https://gwern.net/)
or [Tim Urban](https://waitbutwhy.com/) or [Scott
Alexander](https://astralcodexten.substack.com/). While I don't
necessarily agree with each of them in terms of style or viewpoint, I
do think the sheer energy and depth they bring to helping break down
the world is valuable.

One challenge that individuals face is that over time, they need to
make money. Making public efforts toward legibility is great to get
their name out to the world, but over time in order to raise ongoing
funds, they need to bring more private production into the mix. In
many cases, this leads to a decline in their public production. Rather
than helping the world see more clearly, they're now more focused on
helping their patrons see more clearly.

This isn't necessarily a bad thing. For there to be a path starting
out with public production and then getting a steady stream of income
as a result of that, is itself a positive incentive to engage in
public production in the first place. But in my view of the world it
would be even better if people can stay funded to continue doing great
work on legibiility -- helping the whole world see more clearly.

### The unlikely world of drama fandom

This brings me to [The Fangirl
Verdict](https://thefangirlverdict.com/) and its sole author kfangurl;
her real name is not secret information, but doesn't seem mentioned as
part of her public persona, so I will not use it either. There's a
great [interview of her on
Audible](https://www.audible.com/pd/96-Interview-With-Kfangurl-of-The-Fangirl-Verdict-Podcast/B08W8NPDJX)
that goes in some detail on how she got started in this
space. Remarkably, until the COVID-19 pandeemic, this was just a side
thing for her that made her very little money; she had a full-time
job. When the COVID-19 pandemic led to reduced work, she started
thinking more about switching focus to the blog, and that meant
looking for ways to monetize it.

First off, what's so great about The Fangirl Verdict? Overall, I think
her reviews (mostly of Korean dramas but also some other East Asian
dramas) are really good, well above the standard not just of other
Korean drama reviews, but of reviews in general. The writing structure
follows a [pyramid principle-like
structure](https://medium.com/lessons-from-mckinsey/the-pyramid-principle-f0885dd3c5c7),
making the reviews valuable for people looking for different levels of
depth. Her reviews have innovated in several ways: for instance,
lengthy sections in the review on each character and even pairs of
characters, instead of the more traditional episode-by-episode
recap. And a liberal use of bullet points.

She's also championed several post formats; not just drama reviews but
also "Dear kfangurl" replies where she expertly addresses a question
using her wide-ranging knowledge of patterns across dramas.

Unlike many other drama review sites that I feel tend to flail as they
try to monetize more aggressively, she's been able to maintain quality
while raising quantity in order to be able to make more money off the
site.

I think the following:

* The world would be a better place if more reviewers tried to emulate
  the standards set by her. I wish more dramas had reviews similar in
  quality to hers.

* I'm fairly confident that the world is better off with her
  continuing to focus on The Fangirl Verdict than returning to her day
  job (though it ultimately would be her call). In particular, I don't
  want her to prematurely give up because of challenges figuring out
  the monetizatioon side of it (though if she got bored of the work
  itself it makes sense to stop doing it!).

* At the margin, I prefer that, even as she figures out ways to
  generate private output (such as subscriber-exclusive content) --
  and such content could be valuable in its own way -- she continue to
  create a fair amount of public output, because I feel that that's
  where the bulk of value creation lies. For this reason I want to
  push a little bit in the direction of no-strings-attached funding;
  such funding tugs in the direction of public production.


