This is a good post in that it tries to come up with a concrete story
of how diversity could translate to better outcomes for effective
altruism. I appreciate the concreteness because it makes for better
discussion. I disagree with the claim that the case studies
meaningfully advance the case for diversity, for several reasons that
I try to articulate below.

#### It is possible but not clear if beneficiary preferences meaningfully define what is best

In ordinary life, people's preferences don't necessarily define what
is right for them or what is best for the world. Preferences are
pretty important, and they could do things like capture local
information, but they're also limited by people's lack of knowledge of
relevant facts, lack of self-control, and other factors. So when
you're trying to come up with your best informed judgment of how to
weigh different interventions, listening to the preferences of
beneficiaries is informative, but it's not clear that it's decisive
(in fact, it's not clear that there's a unique right answer).

#### Beneficiary preference seems tricky to define when beneficiaries themselves are to be decided

Once you have fixed the set of beneficiaries for an intervention and
you're thinking of ways to tweak the intervention, the preferences of
the beneficiaries are pretty meaningful. However, when GiveWell is
scanning a wide range of interventions that operate in different
geographic regions and target different beneficiaries, it's a little
trickier to talk about the preferences of the beneficiary. The choice
may be between a program targeting beneficiary group A and another
program targeting a different beneficiary group B. So it's a little
weird to talk about respecting the preferences of the beneficiaries
when the decision of which intervention to support will change who the
beneficiaries are. Things get even murkier because different
beneficiary groups may have fairly different aggregate preferences,
and individual potential beneficiaries may have pretty different
preferences.

#### Given that donors are choosing between a menu of different options (with different beneficiaries), it is ultimately donor preferences that inform what option they select, not beneficiaries

A donor who is choosing to allocate money is deciding between various
ways that money could be spent, potentially affecting different
beneficiaries in different ways. It's the donor's money, not the
beneficiaries' (in fact, potential beneficiaries don't even have
control over whether they end up being actual beneficiaries). The
donor needs *some* way of trading off between the different
interventions between different beneficiaries. Whatever way the donor
chooses is basically donor preferences, not beneficiary preferences.

Some donors may choose to bind themselves to some sort of aggregate of
preferences expressed by the entire pool of potential
beneficiaries. Making this choice is also a donor preference, though.
