# Startup growth stages and their applicability to philanthropy

For-profit businesses that are trying to grow into big companies
(i.e., that don't want to just be small businesses run as lifestyle
businesses) generally go through a series of funding stages. As they
progress through these funding stages, key variables such as the
amounts of money raised, the kind of investors, and the risk involved
change in specific directions.

This post provides a brief overview of well-known facts in this area,
and then looks at the extent to which this applies with startup
nonprofits and philanthropists, and particularly with those with an
effective giving bent.

## Overview of startup funding stages and investor dynamics

Below I highlight a few key aspects of funding stages.  Investopedia
has a [more complete
overview](https://www.investopedia.com/articles/personal-finance/102015/series-b-c-funding-what-it-all-means-and-how-it-works.asp).

### Startups generally have several discrete funding rounds

Typically, a company raises funds in "round". In each round, a
pre-money valuation is set for the company (the total value of the
company before it raises money) and a target is set for how much money
to raise. The total of the pre-money valuation and the money to be
raised is the post-money valuation. Multiple investors may give money
in the round, with the total money from the investors matching the
target to be raised. The equity that each investor gets is the amount
they give divided by the post-money valuation.

### Later rounds have better liquidation preferences

For a more in-depth coverage of liquidation preferences, see [here](https://www.seedinvest.com/blog/angel-investing/liquidation-preferences).

We'll set aside "seed" funding that is a little bit unusual; major
funding rounds generally have a letter associated with them, starting
with Series A (letter "A", first letter of alphabet), then Series B,
then Series C, and so on.

The type of stock that is issued in a given series is named for that
series. For instance, Series A investors get "Series A stock", Series
B investors get "Series B stock", and so on.

Later rounds of stock have stronger liquidation preference. This
matters only if the company exits or shuts down at *less than* the
valuation that it was invested in; in such cases, the investors with
stronger liquidation preference get up to all their money back before
the others start getting anything at all. For instance, let's say
Series A investors invest $1 million at a $4 million post-money
valuation, getting 25% of the company. Then Series B investors invest
$10 million at a $50 million post-money valuation, getting 20% of the
company. Series A investors got diluted down from 25% to 20%, so
seemingly both Series A and Series B investors have 20% each of the
$50 million company.

If the company sells for over $50 million, then Series A and Series B
investors get the same payout (so Series A investors make more profit
because they had to spend less to get that stake).

However, let's say the company sells for $30 million. In that case,
Series B investors will first get their $10 million fully back (so
they'll come out even -- no gain, no loss). Series A investors will
now get back 25% of the remaining $20 million (because they own 25% of
the part of the company not owned by Series B investors). So they'll
get back $5 million. In this case, Series A investors get a smaller
payout, but still make more profit because they entered at such a low
price.

If, however, the company sells for $11 million, then Series B
investors still get $10 million, whereas Series A investors just get
25% of the remaining $1 million, or $250,000. In this case, Series B
investors recoup all their money, but Series A investors lose
$750,000.

When the company goes public, liquidation preferences usually end and
all stock generally gets the same footing.

### What changes between rounds

* The amount of total funding generally goes up from one round to the
  next, right up until the company goes public (where it may raise a
  bunch of money through its initial public offering (IPO) of new
  shares.

* The valuation of the company generally goes up from one round to the
  next, with the largest value being generally achieved when the
  company goes public through an IPO or direct listing; after this the
  value is left to the dictates of the stock market (and is called the
  market cap).

* The sizes of individual investments generally go up from one round
  to the next, except at the very end when the company goes
  public. Once the company is public, investments can be made at
  essentially any size. However, until then, the amounts of money
  raised from each investor generally go up from one round to the
  next. This is not a hard-and-fast rule; for instance, in many
  rounds, the companies set aside some money to raise from smaller
  investors such as friends and family, investors from previous rounds
  who want to add more to their investment, or other strategic
  investors.

  As a general rule (with many exceptions) only investors above a
  certain size would be interested in Series C investments, but
  investors at all sizes can make seed investments.

* The risk generally goes down with each round, but the upside return
  also goes down. The risk goes down for two reasons: (a) liquidation
  preferences and (b) the company has survived many hurdles and
  generally has more traction and a path to success (if it didn't, it
  would have sold out or died before getting to the later round).

### Investors need to make money in aggregate, though not with every investment

For an investor to continue to have money to invest, the investor must
make money from at least some of the investments. This is potentially
less true of angel investors, who generally invest small amounts of
their own money and may not be risking much of their portfolio. But
it's more true of larger investors such as venture capital firms, that
generally form the bulk of Series A and later rounds. VC firms
generally don't own most of the money they invest; they themselves
have to raise money from others (such as pension funds or savings of
wealthy individuals or companies) and are competing with other places
those funds could put their money and get a return, such as the public
markets or real estate.

## How do nonprofits and philanthropy differ from the (for-profit) startups?

### Investors are replaced by donors, who get no private financial return from being the ones to donate

Whereas for-profit investors have the prospect of getting a private
financial return when the company sells or IPOs, donors to nonprofits
have no systematic prospect of getting a private financial
return. There is no expectation to make money.

There are probably some exceptions, such as donations to advocacy
groups and lobbying groups that might directly affect one's
business. In those cases, there may be a nontrivial private financial
return. Even in such cases, though, for the most part, the magnitude
of the return is not depending on the *particular donor* making the
donation. For instance, if I'm a candy manufacturer donating to the
Buy Candy Foundation that opposes bans on candies in school
cafetarias, I may get a nontrivial private financial return from the
donation, but the return I get doesn't depend on *me* being the
donor. So it's even better for me if I can convince others to donate
than if I can donate myself. (This is related to the idea of
[excludability in economics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Excludability)).

### In the absence of private financial returns, the things that donors are optimizing for can vary by donor

In the for-profit world, the investors who successfully get better
returns have more money to invest (both directly from the returns they
get, and indirectly because showing good returns allows them to raise
more money to invest). So, investors who get good returns can
dominate, overriding to some extent the intentions and desires of
specific investors.

Since the "private financial return" mechanism is missing for
nonprofit donations, various other mechanisms take its place, but
there is no clear overarching mechanism -- a lot depends on the
preferences of the donors and the specific situational dynamics. For
instance, in the effective altruist (EA) community, donors are looking
to achieve certain kinds of impact, so they judge their past donations
that way. Moreover, intermediary funds in EA, such as the EA Funds,
need to demonstrate to the individual donors supporting them that they
are granting money in ways consistent with what those individual
donors want, in order to keep raising money.

### Since there is no private financial return, the whole risk/reward tradeoff takes a more surreal feel

In the for-profit world, the risk/reward tradeoff is real; for
instance, Y Combinator, a seed investor and accelerator, makes a huge
amount of money from the startups it invests in that succeed (such as
Airbnb or Reddit) and loses money on most of its startup
investments. So they take more risk and get more reward. Late stage
investors in Airbnb take less risk, and get less reward. Investors
with different appetites on the risk/reward tradeoff can gravitate to
different places in the investment spectrum (though this is only one
consideration among many).

Things get more surreal in the nonprofit world, since both the "risk"
and the "reward" are *social*, not private. It isn't clear that a
person's position on the risk/reward tradeoff as an investor should
have any bearing on that person's position on the risk/reward tradeoff
as a donor.

There are, however, still reasons that donors may care about
minimizing risk and maximizing reward. This is particularly the case
for effective altruists, but is also broadly true of anybody who's
interested in their donation actually having an impact. Donors may
also differ in where they land on the risk/reward tradeoff based on
the social dynamics and the likelihood of triggering followup
donations.

Back in GiveWell's early days, Holden [essentially
claimed](https://blog.givewell.org/2007/11/20/heres-to-fear-of-failure/)
that there wasn't enough late-stage investment; everybody wanted to
fund new, innovative things. He argued that people were not afraid of
the "risk" side of the risk/reward tradeoff enough! This is probably
at least partly because the risk is social, not private, and there's
no automatic feedback mechanism where people who fail run out of money
faster than people who succeed.

### The absence of private return also creates weird coordination dynamics

I know that if I donate $100,000 to a great charity, I'll be $100,000
poorer and the world will be better off. But I also know that if
instead I spend $1,000 convincing you to donate $100,000 to the same
charity, I'll be just $1,000 poorer and the world will still be
richer. That leaves me $99,000 to convince other people, and arguably
I could 100x my impact if I could find 100 people like you.

Convincing is one thing; I could also threaten. For instance, if I
know that you'll donate conditional to me not donating, I'm better off
not donating. It's like a [game of
chicken](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chicken_(game)). The point is
that I have very little incentive to be the one to actually donate --
I just need the money moved, and it's better for me selfishly, and
plausibly even better for my altruistic impact, if I can get others to
pay the money.

How serious are these coordination dynamics?

* Within the EA community, people take these coordination dynamics
  issues seriously, and try to address them, though their solutions
  are open to debate. For instance, the [Survival and Flourishing
  Fund's S-process](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jWivz6KidkI) uses
  a simulation where small amounts of each donor's allocation are
  allocated to the best uses at the margin. This addresses the
  situation where donors try to get other donors to cover the obvious,
  "shared" donees so that they can spend more of their budget on the
  things they personally prefer.

* In the world of philanthropy at large, some of these coordination
  dynamics issues are less prevalent even to begin with, partly just
  because most donors aren't trying to be that strategic in the first
  place. Also, donors may care more about "being the ones to donate";
  in this case, the "private financial return" is substituted by the
  "private egotistical return" that is in principle bad from the
  perspective of wanting to be truly effective, but on the plus side
  reduces the incentive to outsmart other donors in coordination
  dynamics.

### Reviewing "what changes between rounds" in the nonprofit context

With nonprofits, we don't generally have this discrete concept of
rounds, though things like end-of-year fundraisers can somewhat
approximate rounds. We have more of a continuum of growth of the
organization, and the revenue and spending of the organization as it
grows.

We can still try to ask how much of what we said in "What changes
between rounds" loosely applies to the nonprofit space. Let's look:

* The amount of total funding generally goes up: This is true,
  assuming the nonprofit is growing, i.e., that it is scaling up its
  programs.

* The valuation goes up: There is no concept of valuation!

* The sizes of individual donations go up as the organization grows,
  until it becomes so big and famous that it can just raise money from
  random people (the equivalent of "IPO"): This is sort-of-true, but
  not for all organizations. Many nonprofits grow in a grassroots
  fashion by growing the number of donors rather than growing the size
  of donations.

  With that said, the growth of nonprofits in EA and EA-adjacent
  spaces, that rely on donors in the EA space, *has* shown the pattern
  of raising larger amounts of money per donor as they grow. Moreover,
  at least in global health and development, there's something
  somewhat analogous to going public: becoming a GiveWell top charity,
  at which point the nonprofit can attract significant direct
  donations from individual donors.

### Small donors: at both ends?

In the for-profit world, very small investors are limited to the
public markets. Small investors can play at either end:
they can invest in seed rounds (as "angels"), or they can play in the
public market. But it's hard for them to get in the numbered series
rounds unless they are sufficiently well-connected to get in as
"friends and family".

We don't have strict restrictions of this kind in the nonprofit world:
most nonprofits allow anybody to donate! But there's probably
something loosely qualitatively similar, driven by the amount of "time
overhead" it makes sense to spend in light of the amount of money
being donated. So, very small donors generally tend to give money to
safe, well-understood things -- somewhat like investing in the public
market. Small-but-not-very-small donors (e.g., people donating a few
thousand dollars) tend to either gravitate toward well-understood
opportunities (akin to the public market) or go for something very
niche that they feel they have a comparative advantage in evaluating
(akin to angel investing). This doesn't necessarily map to a very
specific set of organizations at either end, because things are more
fuzzy here and anybody can donate to any nonprofit (for the most part).

### Big donors: do they support things at all stages of the lifecycle?

Investors with a lot of money tend to play throughout the spectrum:
from angels to late-stage investors (e.g., Series C) to the public
markets. A particular investor may choose to focus based on the
risk/reward tradeoff, personal excitement, and specialization. What
about donors? Are donors available to fund all stages in the
lifecycle?

Interestingly, it looks like the funding institutions in and around
the EA community seem to be much better at this than philanthropy at
large: the big donors and institutions tend to reliably fund
organizations that are generally agreed upon to be doing good work
even though there isn't a high reward upside (either private or
social).

For instance, pretty much any organization relatively well-respected
in the EA community can generally raise money without spending a lot
of effort through one of these: Survival and Flourishing Fund (money
mostly from Jaan Tallinn), Open Philanthropy, EA Funds, and the FTX
Future Fund. Which one they actually raise money from can be a bit
random. But my general impression is that in the EA space,
organizations generally have to spend a smaller share of their time
and energy into fundraising and marketing around fundraising; they can
rely on these donors and top-up grants at least as far as keeping them
sustained at their current budget is concerned.

My general impression is that the world of philanthropy at large is
more dysfunctional. cf. Holden's [fear of failure
post](https://blog.givewell.org/2007/11/20/heres-to-fear-of-failure/)
that I previously cited.

Unincorporated stuff:

https://blog.givewell.org/2008/10/20/should-small-donors-focus-on-small-organizations/
