Of late, I have been interested in how the distribution of donors to a
specific charity looks, and how this affects the strategy charities
need to follow with fundraising and financial planning. My goal is to
better understand the entire dynamics of the ecosystem (of donors and
donees affecting each other). Ultimately, I hope this will help with
better identifying the true marginal impact of donations.

In the context of the effective altruist (EA) funding ecosystem, I
identified three types of donors with different qualitative
characteristics:

1. Primary donors: They fund over long timeframes (1 to 5 years),
   cover a large share of the charity's budget (25% or higher), and
   usually have a more formal structure. In the EA community, the Open
   Philanthropy Project (Open Phil) is a dominant primary donor to
   many AI safety orgs, many animal welfare orgs, many EA meta orgs,
   and (if annual grants recommended to GiveWell top charities are
   included) many of the GiveWell top charities.

2. Top-up donors: They usually have more frequent funding cycles
   (several times a year), fund smaller amounts per cycle, and help
   close the room for more funding of the charity over shorter
   timeframe. In the EA community, some funds that have acted as
   top-up donors for many charities are: the EA Funds (the Animal
   Welfare Fund, Long Term Future Fund, Meta Fund, and Global Health
   and Development Fund), GiveWell discretionary regranting (funded by
   Good Ventures), Animal Charity Evaluators' Recommended Charity
   Fund, and the Berkeley Existential Risk Initiative (BERI) (which
   appears to have transitioned this role to the Survival and
   Flourishing Fund (SFF)).

3. Other donors, usually individual and smaller foundation donors:
   They grant more erratically, and the total amount per donor is
   lower.

I see the value of this post primarily in terms of shedding light on
the role of top-up donors, who are a relatively new feature of the EA
funding ecosystem.

## The role of primary donors such as the Open Philanthropy Project (Open Phil)

Primary donors play a number of important roles:

* The primary donors provide a large proportional share of the
  charity's budget, and likely pay upfront, giving the recipient
  charity flexibility and financial liquidity.

* The primary donors provide long-term funding, which helps the
  recipient charity plan for the longer term.

* The primary donors play an important role in validating the
  recipient charity and its budget. That's because when the primary
  donor agrees to fund the charity, that is an implicit endorsement
  that the charity's overall budget is reasonable, even if the primary
  donor does not fully fill the budget. For instance, if an
  organization submits a $2 million/year budget, and Open Phil (in
  keeping with its funding limit of 50%) agrees to fund it at $1
  million/year for a few years, this means that Open Phil thinks that
  (a) a budget of $2 million/year is reasonable and the activities in
  that budget are worth Open Phil's money, and (b) the charity is
  likely to be able to raise the remaining $1 million/year from other
  donors.

### Primary donors and donation-funging

Small marginal donations to a charity generally don't displace funding
from the primary donor. If anything, there may be a weak positive
feedback from other donors to the primary donor. That's because the
primary donor makes decisions at the timescale of a year or more, and
when it decides whether to donate next year, it is more likely to
donate more if the recipient charity has been able to grow more due to
other donations.

In the case of Open Phil, their rule to limit funding to 50% of the
recipient's budget makes the positive feedback a little sharper.

With that said, sufficiently large donations from other donors may or
may not displace donations from the primary donor; the dynamics are
complicated and vary case-by-case.

### Open Phil as a primary donor

Until 2015, I believe many of the top organizations supported in the
EA community, including EA meta orgs, animal welfare orgs, and AI
safety orgs, lacked a primary donor, or were in tthe process of losing
their primary donor (for instance, the Thiel Foundation supported MIRI
till only about 2015). In 2016 and 2017, Open Phil took on the role of
primary donor for these organizations.

## The role of top-up donors

Top-up donors -- at least, publicly known top-up donors -- are a
relatively recent phenomenon in the EA community. They started
appearing in 2017, with the emergence of the EA Funds and the Berkeley
Existential Risk Initiative (BERI). In September 2019, BERI would
transition the relevant grantmaking to the Survival and Flourishing
Fund (SFF).

Some features of top-up donors:

* Top-up donors generally make granting decisions every few months
  (ranging from 3 to 6 months). They may not, however, select a
  particular charity in a specific grant round, even though they
  select it in earlier or later rounds.

* Top-up donors pay more attention to the current financials of the
  organization, and the funding they provide within each round is only
  sufficient for a short time horizon. In particular, they help
  provide a hedge to recipient charities against unexpected expenses
  or fundraising difficulties.

### Examples of top-up donations

Examples of top-up donations include:

* The EA Meta Fund's grants to 80,000 Hours and Founders Pledge, seen
  in multiple grant rounds.

* Grants from the EA Long-Term Future Fund to MIRI and CFAR.

* Grants from the EA Animal Welfare Fund to The Humane League.

* Grants from BERI (and later SFF) to MIRI, CFAR, and 80,000 Hours.

I am not claiming here that all or even most grants by the EA Funds or
BERI are top-up grants. The EA Funds, in particular, make a number of
other donations to individuals or smaller organizations, many of which
aren't being supported by Open Phil or any other prrimary donor at
all. Also, BERI/SFF has played the role of primary donor for LessWrong
2.0, whose budget is small enough that it can be almost entirely
covered by BERI/SFF.

### Top-up donors and donation-funging

My general estimate is that donating to a charity reduces the
likelihood and amount of funding it will receive from top-up donors in
the short term.
